
The Exemplary Tale of Śārdūlakarṇa {M.1} Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One was dwelling at Śrāvastī in Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s park.
One morning, the venerable Ānanda put on his robes, took his alms bowl, and entered the city of Śrāvastī for alms.
Afterward, having walked his alms round and having had his meal, the venerable Ānanda went to a well for some water.
At that moment there was an outcaste girl named Prakṛti drawing water at that well.
The venerable Ānanda said to the outcaste girl Prakṛti, “Please give me some, sister.
I would like to drink some water.”
The outcaste girl Prakṛti replied to the venerable Ānanda, “I am an outcaste girl, Venerable Ānanda.”
“Sister, I did not ask you for your family or caste,” said the venerable Ānanda.
“Rather, if you can spare some water, please give me some.”
The outcaste girl then gave some water to the venerable Ānanda.
After drinking the water, the venerable Ānanda set off.
Having closely and thoroughly taken in the features of the venerable Ānanda’s body, face, and voice, the outcaste girl Prakṛti became engrossed in shallow thoughts.
Full of desire, she thought, {M.2} “I wish that the noble Ānanda were my husband.
My mother, who is a great holder of spells, should be able to draw in the noble Ānanda and make him my husband.”
The outcaste girl Prakṛti then took the water jug and went to her outcaste home.
Upon arrival, she set the water jug aside and said to her mother, “O mother, listen, there is an ascetic named Ānanda who is a disciple and the attendant of the great ascetic Gautama.
I want to have him as my husband. Mother, you should be able to draw him in!”
“My child,” replied her mother, “I should be able to draw in Ānanda, unless he is dead or free from desires.
But King Prasenajit of Kauśala is immensely devoted, loyal, and committed to the ascetic Gautama.
If he came to know of this, he would bring the entire outcaste family to ruin.
I have heard that the ascetic Gautama is free from desires, and one who is free from desire overcomes all.”
When this was said, the outcaste girl Prakṛti said to her mother, “Mother, even if the ascetic Gautama is free from desires, should you not obtain the venerable Ānanda from him, I will forsake my life!
If you get him, I will live!”
“Do not forsake your life, my child.
I will obtain the ascetic Ānanda,” her mother replied. Thereupon, in the middle of the courtyard, the mother of the outcaste girl Prakṛti smeared cow dung on the floor and shaped it into a ritual platform.
After having strewn it with darbha grass, she set it on fire, and she threw one hundred and eight arka flowers into the fire one by one while reciting mantras.
This was the formula: {M.3} Amale vimale kuṅkume sumane | yena baddho ’si vidyut | icchayā devo varṣati vidyotati garjati vismayaṃ mahārājasya samabhi­vardhayituṃ devebhyo manuṣyebhyo gandharvebhyaḥ | śikhigrahā devā viśikhi­grahā devā ānanda­syāgamanāya kramaṇāya juhomi svāhā || At that moment, the venerable Ānanda’s mind became entranced, and he left the monastery and walked to the home of the outcastes.
When the outcaste mother saw the venerable Ānanda coming from afar, she said to her daughter Prakṛti, “My child, that is the ascetic Ānanda who is coming.
Go and prepare a bed.”
Thrilled, elated, and overjoyed, the outcaste girl Prakṛti set about preparing a bed for the venerable Ānanda.
When the venerable Ānanda had reached the outcaste house, he approached the ritual platform and stood by its side.
He then cried out and wept, “I find myself in this dreadful predicament, and now the Blessed One does not take notice of me!”
At that very moment, however, the Blessed One took notice of the venerable Ānanda, and having taken notice of him, he immediately vanquished the mantras of the outcaste with the mantras of a perfectly awakened one.
This was the formula: Sthitir acyutiḥ anīti svasti sarva­prāṇibhyaḥ | {M.4} saraḥ prasannaṃ nirdoṣaṃ praśāntaṃ sarvato ’bhayaṃ | ītayo yatra śāmyanti bhayāni calitāni ca | taṃ vai devā namasyanti sarvasiddhāś ca yoginaḥ | etena satyavākyena svasty ānandāya bhikṣave || Then, once the spell of the outcaste had been broken, the venerable Ānanda left the house of the outcastes and began to walk back to his monastery.
The outcaste girl Prakṛti saw this, and as she watched the venerable Ānanda going back, she said to her mother, “Mother, this ascetic Ānanda is going back!”
“Surely, my child,” said he mother, “the ascetic Gautama must have noticed him and countered my mantras.”
“But, mother,” replied Prakṛti, “do we not have mantras more powerful than those of the ascetic Gautama?”
“My child,” the mother replied, “we do not have mantras more powerful than those of the ascetic Gautama.
Even mantras that are overpowering to the entire world, my child, are all vanquished by the ascetic Gautama when he wishes, but the world does not have the power to counter the mantras of the ascetic Gautama.
In this way the mantras of the ascetic Gautama are more powerful.”
The venerable Ānanda then arrived at where the Blessed One was.
Having approached him, he venerated the Blessed One’s feet with his head and stood to one side.
As the venerable Ānanda stood there, the Blessed One said to him, “Take up this six-syllable formula, Ānanda, and retain, recite, and master it for the benefit and welfare of yourself, and for the benefit and welfare of monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen.
Ānanda, this six-syllable formula has been spoken by the six tathāgata, arhat, perfectly awakened ones of the past, as well as by the Four Great Kings, by Śakra, lord of the gods, and by Brahmā, lord of this Sahā world.
And now it is spoken by me, Śākyamuni, the Perfectly Awakened One.
You should therefore retain, recite, and master it.
It is as follows: {M.5} Aṇḍare paṇḍare keyūre ’dhihaste saragrīve bandhumati dhara viṣa cili mili sātinimne yathāsaṃbhakte golapati kaṇḍavilāya || “Ānanda, this six-syllable formula offers protection and blessing, such that if one is to be executed, one will be released with the strike of a rod; if one is to be struck with a rod, one will be released with the blow of a fist; and if one is to be struck with the fist, one will be released with a reprimand.”
“Ānanda, I do not see anything in this world with its gods, its Māra, and its Brahmā, among the multitudes with their ascetics and brahmins, with their groups of gods, humans, and asuras, that can overpower when one is protected by this six-syllable formula, when one is blessed with a protective thread tied around one’s arm—except for the maturation of past karma.”
{M.6} With the passing of that night, the outcaste girl Prakṛti washed herself, put on new clothes, and adorned herself with a pearl necklace.
She then went to the city of Śrāvastī, where she stood by the city gate and waited for the venerable Ānanda to come, thinking, “The monk Ānanda will certainly be coming by this road.”
In the morning, the venerable Ānanda put on his robes, took his alms bowl, and entered the city of Śrāvastī for alms.
The outcaste girl Prakṛti saw the venerable Ānanda coming from afar, and she followed him closely from behind, going wherever he went and stopping wherever he stopped, standing silently by the door at each house where he entered for alms.
The venerable Ānanda noticed the outcaste girl Prakṛti following him closely from behind.
Embarrassed, intimidated, uneasy, and troubled, he quickly left the city of Śrāvastī and proceeded to Jetavana.
When the venerable Ānanda reached the Blessed One, he venerated the Blessed One’s feet with his head and stood to one side.
The venerable Ānanda then said to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, this outcaste girl has been following me closely from behind, going wherever I go, stopping wherever I stop.
At each house I enter for alms, she stands silently by the door.
Help me, Blessed One.
Help me, Well-Gone One.”
On hearing this, the Blessed One said to the venerable Ānanda, “Do not be afraid, do not be afraid.”
The Blessed One then asked the outcaste girl Prakṛti, “Prakṛti, is it that you wish to be married to the monk Ānanda?”
“Venerable Sir, it is my wish,” she replied.
The Blessed One said, {M.7} “Prakṛti, have your parents given you permission regarding the monk Ānanda?”
“They have given their permission, Blessed One.
They have given their permission, Well-Gone One.”
“Then you must have them give their permission in my presence.”
In obeisance to the Blessed One, the outcaste girl Prakṛti venerated the Blessed One’s feet with her head, circumambulated him three times, and took her leave of him, setting off to her parents.
When she reached her parents, she venerated their feet with her head, stood to one side, and said to her parents, “Mother, father, please grant me to Ānanda in the presence of the ascetic Gautama.”
At this, her parents went with the outcaste girl Prakṛti to where the Blessed One was.
Having approached him, they venerated the Blessed One’s feet with their heads and sat down to one side.
The outcaste girl Prakṛti then venerated the Blessed One’s feet with her head and stood to one side.
She said to the Blessed One, “These, Blessed One, are my parents, who have come.”
Thereupon the Blessed One asked the parents of the outcaste girl Prakṛti, “Have you given your daughter Prakṛti permission regarding the monk Ānanda?”
“We have given our permission, Blessed One.
We have given our permission, Well-Gone One.”
“Then you may return to your home.”
At this, the parents of the outcaste girl Prakṛti venerated the Blessed One’s feet with their heads, circumambulated him three times, and took their leave of him.
Once he knew that the parents of the outcaste girl Prakṛti had left, the Blessed One asked the outcaste girl Prakṛti, “Prakṛti, do you want to be with the monk Ānanda?”
“I want to be with him, Blessed One.
I want to be with him, Well-Gone One.”
“If so, Prakṛti, then you should adopt the attire of the monk Ānanda.”
“I will adopt it, Blessed One.
I will adopt it, Well-Gone One.
Please allow me to go forth, Blessed One.
Please allow me to go forth, Well-Gone One.”
{M.8} Then the Blessed One said to the outcaste girl Prakṛti, “Come, nun, live the spiritual life.”
When this was said, the outcaste girl Prakṛti had her hair shaven off and became clad in yellow ochre robes by the Blessed One.
When he had thus turned the outcaste girl Prakṛti into a nun and allowed her to go forth, the Blessed One instructed, encouraged, uplifted, and inspired her with a dharmic talk.
It was a talk to be heard as a remedy for sentient beings who have been stuck in saṃsāra for a long time, that is, a talk about generosity, a talk about ethical conduct, a talk about the heavens, about the dangers associated with sense pleasures, about finding release, about the perils, about the mental afflictions, defilement, and purification, and about the factors pertaining to awakening—these were the things that the Blessed One fully explained to the nun Prakṛti.
Instructed, encouraged, uplifted, and inspired with a dharmic talk by the Blessed One, the nun Prakṛti had a mind that was elated, propitious, rejoicing, without hindrances, upright, and without rigidity, by which she became ready to understand the teaching of the Dharma.{M.9} When the Blessed One knew that the nun Prakṛti had a mind that was elated, propitious, rejoicing, without hindrances, and without rigidity, by which she was ready and able to understand the most elevated Dharma teaching, the Blessed One expounded in full to the nun Prakṛti that most elevated Dharma teaching of the blessed buddhas on penetrating the four truths of the noble ones, that is to say, suffering, its origin, cessation, and the way.
Then, while sitting there on her seat, the nun Prakṛti directly realized the four truths of the noble ones, that is, suffering, its origin, cessation, and the way.
Just as when a spotless cloth fit for dyeing is put in liquid dye it completely absorbs the dye, the nun Prakṛti, while sitting there on her seat, directly realize the four truths of the noble ones, that is, suffering, its origin, cessation, and the way.
When the nun Prakṛti had thus seen the Dharma, attained the Dharma, realized the Dharma, become unshakable in the Dharma, understood the Dharma as conclusive, turned toward the attainment of the goal, surmounted all doubt, overcome all uncertainty, had no more queries, attained complete confidence, and become one who pursues the Dharma in the Teacher’s instruction, no longer relying on or being led by others, becoming thoroughbred in the teachings, she fell at the Blessed One’s feet and said to the Blessed One, “I have transgressed, Blessed One.
I have transgressed, Well-Gone One.
Like a fool, like an idiot, like a stupid person, like an unskillful person, I had bad judgment and acted on the wish to have the monk Ānanda as my husband.
Venerable Sir, I thus see my transgression as a transgression.
Seeing this transgression as a transgression, I confess this transgression. I admit that this transgression was a transgression.
I am committed to restraint from transgression.
Hence, may the Blessed One know of that transgression of mine as a transgression.
May he be accepting of it out of compassion.”
The Blessed One said, “As you stand firmly in refraining from transgression, Prakṛti, you have understood your transgression as a transgression, saying that like a fool, like an idiot, like a stupid person, like an unskillful person, you had bad judgment and acted on the wish to have the monk Ānanda as your husband.{M.10} Since you know your transgression, see your transgression, and are committed to restraint from transgression, I shall be accepting of your transgression as a transgression.
Being henceforth committed to restraint, you should expect a growth of wholesome qualities, not a loss.”
Having been commended and instructed by the Blessed One, the nun Prakṛti withdrew to a solitary place and vigilantly, ardently, mindfully, fully aware, and effortfully dwelled in seclusion.
On account of having her hair shaven off, having donned the yellow ochre robes, and having gone forth with perfect faith from home to homelessness, the young lady directly knew, realized, and attained by herself, in this lifetime, the conclusion of the unsurpassable sublime life.
She proclaimed, “Birth has come to an end for me, the sublime life has been lived, what was to be done has been done, and I know there is no more cyclic existence from here.”
Now, the brahmins and householders of Śrāvastī came to hear that an outcaste girl had gone forth under the Blessed One.
Hearing of this, they condemned it, saying, “How could an outcaste girl live the perfect life of monks?
How could she live the perfect life of nuns, devoted laymen, and devoted laywomen?
How could an outcaste girl enter the communities of brahmins, kṣatriyas, householders, and landlords?”{M.11} Moreover, King Prasenajit of Kauśala came to hear that an outcaste had gone forth under the Blessed One.
Hearing of this, he also condemned it, saying, “How could an outcaste girl live the perfect life of monks?
How could she live the perfect life of nuns, devoted laymen, and devoted laywomen?
How could she enter the communities of brahmins, kṣatriyas, householders, and landlords?”
Reflecting on this, he had a fine carriage yoked.
After mounting this fine carriage, he departed from Śrāvastī, accompanied by a large group of brahmins and householders from Śrāvastī.
As he approached Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s park, he went as far as the terrain allowed his carriage to go, and then dismounted from his carriage and entered Anāthapiṇḍada’s park by foot, accompanied by an army of foot soldiers.
Having entered, he approached the Blessed One, venerated the Blessed One’s feet with his head, and sat to one side.
The large group of brahmins and householders from Śrāvastī likewise venerated the Blessed One’s feet with their heads and sat down to one side.
Some engaged in various kinds of pleasant and congenial conversation with the Blessed One and then sat down to one side.
Some conveyed their maternal and paternal names and lines of descent in front of the Blessed One and then sat down to one side.
Some bowed to the Blessed One with folded hands and then sat down to one side.
And some sat down to one side silently.
The Blessed One knew what was on the minds of King Prasenajit of Kauśala and the large group of brahmins and householders from Śrāvastī.
Thus, in order to tell the account of the nun Prakṛti’s past life, he called for the nun and addressed the monks, “Monks, do you wish to hear from the Tathāgata a Dharma story concerning the nun Prakṛti’s past life?”
The monks replied to the Blessed One, “It is an appropriate time, Blessed One.
It is an appropriate moment, Well-Gone One, for the Blessed One to tell a Dharma story concerning the nun Prakṛti’s past life.
{M.12} After hearing it from the Blessed One, we will retain it.”
“So then, monks, listen and pay attention well and carefully. I will speak.”
“Yes, excellent Blessed One,” the monks replied in obeisance to the Blessed One.
The Blessed One spoke as follows: “Previously, monks, in a past time, on the riverbank of the Ganges, in an area thick with forests of atimuktaka and sal trees, there lived an outcaste king named Triśaṅku, together with many thousands of outcastes.
Monks, that outcaste king named Triśaṅku remembered the Vedas, having learned them in past lives, together with their auxiliary sciences and auxiliary sub-sciences, their secret teaching, their glossaries and ritual instructions, their divisions into syllables, and the fifth Veda of the epics, as well as other treatises.
Proficient in words and grammar and fully versed in worldly science, sacrificial mantras, and the characteristics of a great man, without any doubts he gave expositions according to the Dharma and taught the Vedic observances as they were traditionally passed down.
“Moreover, that king Triśaṅku had a son, a young prince named Śārdūlakarṇa, who was endowed with all good qualities in bodily appearance, family lineage, ethical conduct, and virtue and was handsome, good looking, and pleasing to behold, having a supremely resplendent excellence of complexion.
King Triśaṅku taught the prince Śārdūlakarṇa the Vedas as he had learned them in past lives, with their auxiliary sciences and auxiliary sub-sciences, their secret teaching, their glossaries and ritual instructions, their divisions into syllables, the fifth Veda of the epics, and other treatises, as well as expositions according to the Dharma and the Vedic observances.
“Then King Triśaṅku thought, ‘This son of mine, the prince Śārdūlakarṇa, is perfectly endowed in bodily appearance, family lineage, ethical conduct, and virtue.
Being endowed with all good qualities, {M.13} he is handsome, good looking, and pleasing to behold, having a supremely resplendent excellence of complexion.
Having practiced the observances and having learned the mantras, he has mastered the Vedas.
This is the time when I should fulfill the duty of getting him married.
So now where do I find for my son Śārdūlakarṇa a suitable wife who possesses ethical conduct, virtue, and beauty?
“Now, at that time, there was a brahmin named Puṣkarasārin who lived in the district town called Utkaṭa, which abounded in beings, which had grass, wood, and water, which continually yielded grains, and which had been given to him as a brahmic gift by the king Agnidatta.
The brahmin Puṣkarasārin was completely pure by both his maternal and his paternal sides, having an undisturbed family lineage and being able to state the caste and line of descent of his foremothers and forefathers up to seven generations.
On account of that, he was a teacher who, as a holder of the mantras, had mastered the three Vedas with their auxiliary sciences and sub-sciences, their secret teaching, their glossaries and ritual instructions, their divisions into syllables, and the fifth Veda of the epics, and he was proficient in words and grammar and fully versed in worldly science, sacrificial mantras, and the characteristics of a great man.
“The brahmin Puṣkarasārin had a daughter, a young maiden named Prakṛti, who was perfectly endowed in bodily appearance, family lineage, ethical conduct, and virtue.
Being endowed with all good qualities, she was beautiful, good looking, and pleasing to behold, having a supremely resplendent excellence of complexion.
“Then the outcaste king Triśaṅku thought, ‘To the northeast there is a district town called Utkaṭa, where there lives a brahmin named Puṣkarasārin.
He is perfectly endowed both by his maternal and his paternal sides {M.14} and is fully versed in the three Vedas and the scriptures.
He enjoys ownership over the district town called Utkaṭa, which abounds in beings, which has grass, wood, and water, which continually yields grains, and which has been given to him as a brahmic gift by the king Agnidatta.
That brahmin Puṣkarasārin has a daughter, a young maiden named Prakṛti, who is perfectly endowed in bodily appearance, family lineage, and ethical conduct, and who, endowed with all good qualities, is beautiful, good looking, and pleasing to behold, having a supremely resplendent excellence of complexion.
Possessing ethical conduct and virtue, she should be a suitable wife for my son Śārdūlakarṇa.’
“King Triśaṅku thought about this matter all night, and when the night had passed, at daybreak he mounted his fully white, mare-drawn chariot and, accompanied by a large group of outcaste officials, left the outcaste palace and set off north for the district town of Utkaṭa.
King Triśaṅku arrived at a park called Sumanaska to the northeast of Utkaṭa, which, being covered by various kinds of trees, with various kinds of trees blooming, and various kinds of birds singing, was delightful like the Nandana grove of the gods.
There he stayed, waiting for the brahmin Puṣkarasārin, knowing, ‘The brahmin Puṣkarasārin will come to teach mantras to brahmin youths here.’
“After the passing of that night, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin had also mounted a fully white, mare-drawn chariot {M.15} and, accompanied by a group of students consisting of five hundred brahmin youths, set out from Utkaṭa to teach mantras to the young brahmins.
“The outcaste king Triśaṅku saw the brahmin Puṣkarasārin coming from afar, ablaze with radiance like a rising sun, like a flaring sacrificial fire, like an offering ritual accompanied by scores of brahmins, like Śakra accompanied by scores of gods, like the Himālaya range accompanied by its flora, like the ocean accompanied by jewels, like the moon accompanied by the constellations of stars, like Vaiśravaṇa accompanied by hosts of yakṣas, and like Brahmā accompanied by groups of gods and sages.
Seeing him, he went to meet him in accordance with propriety and said, ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, welcome!
There is a matter I wish to discuss with you—please listen.’
“Thus addressed, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin said to the outcaste king Triśaṅku, ‘No, dear Triśaṅku, it is not appropriate for you to use “dear” with a brahmin.’
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, I can use “dear.” ’
“ ‘While it is appropriate for me to use it, it is not appropriate for you to do so.’
“ ‘But dear Puṣkarasārin, a man has four duties that have been undertaken since bygone times: those for the sake of oneself, those for the sake of someone else, those for the sake of one’s kin, {M.16} and those for the sake of all beings in totality.
This is a very important matter that I wish to discuss with you—please listen.
Please grant your daughter Prakṛti as wife for my son Śārdūlakarṇa. I will bestow on you whatever dowry you have in mind.’
“Hearing these words from the outcaste king Triśaṅku, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin was deeply offended, upset, furious, and not at all pleased.
Full of anger, hostility, and resentment, he knit his brow into a three-pointed frown, gasped and panted while rolling his eyes, and, having become red like a mongoose, said to the outcaste king Triśaṅku, ‘Fie on you, you vulgar fellow!
You outcaste!
This is not appropriate speech for a dog-cooking one!
You, who are lowly and born from an outcaste womb, wish to insult a brahmin versed in the Vedas!
O evil-minded one: “ ‘You are not aware of your nature, And you think much of yourself!
Do not try to put a mustard seed on the tip of a hair.
Do not make for any aggravation!
“ ‘Do not solicit the unsolicitable.
Do not try to catch the wind with a noose!{M.17} Gold never becomes ashes, deluded one!
How is the distinction between bright and dark not perceived?
“ ‘For you are born from an outcaste womb, Whereas I am a twice-born.
Deluded one, how could you, as a lowly one, Seek to forge ties with someone superior?
“ ‘You are born from an outcaste womb, Whereas I am born as a twice-born, And a superior one does not wish To forge ties with someone inferior.
“ ‘For the superior twice-born establish Matrimonial ties with the superior, Those who are endowed with Vedic lore And completely pure in conduct, “ ‘Who are entirely impeccable by caste, Who have attained mastery in the mantras, Who are teachers and holders of the mantras, Who are fully versed in the three Vedas— “ ‘Brahmins who have learned the Vedas With their glossaries and ritual instructions.
It is with such ones that the twice-born Establish matrimonial ties here, “ ‘For a superior one does not wish To forge ties with the inferior.
You solicit the unsolicitable— It is to catch the wind with a noose That you wish to establish Matrimonial ties with us.
“ ‘A miserable one, the lowest of persons, Is repulsive to the entire world. Go, you inferior fellow, quick!
Why do you thus disrespect us?{M.18} “ ‘Outcastes go with outcastes, Cemetery keepers with cemetery keepers.
Here, a caste only establishes Matrimonial ties with its caste— “ ‘Brahmins with brahmins, Kṣatriyas with kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas with vaiśyas, And śūdras with śūdras.
“ ‘Like go with like; They get married to each other.
Outcastes definitely do not establish Matrimonial ties with brahmins.
“ ‘You are of the lowest of all births, Despised by all the classes. How could you, as a lowly one, Seek to forge ties with the superior?’
“Hearing these words from the brahmin Puṣkarasārin, the outcaste king Triśaṅku replied: “ ‘While a distinction is perceived Between ashes and gold, There is really no distinction Between a brahmin and one of another caste.
“ ‘While a distinction is perceived Between bright and dark, There is really no distinction Between a brahmin and one of another caste.
“ ‘Brahmins did not spring forth From the sky or the wind, Nor are they born bursting from the earth Like fire from rubbing fire-sticks.
“ ‘Brahmins are born from a womb, And outcastes, too, are born from a womb.
So what reason do you really see For superiority or inferiority?
“ ‘And just as it is with other births, A brahmin, too, when he is discarded at death, Is likewise held to be impure and repulsive.
What, then, is the difference between them?
{M.19} “ ‘Whatever sinful action there is That is wicked and evil, It has been propounded by brahmins In order to oppress beings.
“ ‘So it is that actions for the ancestors Are propounded by brahmins, And while committing terrible deeds, The twice-born say, “I am virtuous.”
“ ‘It has been contrived By brahmins wanting to eat meat That goats and sheep sacrificed With mantras go to heaven.
“ ‘If this is the way to heaven, Then why would these brahmins Not sacrifice with mantras Themselves or their kin?
“ ‘Why would these twice-born Not sacrifice their mothers and fathers, Their brothers and sisters, Their sons, daughters, and wives?
“ ‘Having been sacrificed with mantras, Their friends, relatives, and companions, Even their fellow citizens, Would all be going to heaven.
“ ‘Having offered them through sacrificial rituals, They would all be going to the good place, So then what is the use of sacrificed animals?
Why would you not sacrifice yourself?
“ ‘Neither through sacrifice nor through mantras Do goats and sheep go to heaven, For this is not the way to heaven.
This is called wrong sacrifice.
“ ‘This device, however, was thought up By brahmins with vicious minds.
The sacrifice of animals was contrived By those who want to eat meat.
“ ‘Let me describe something else That brahmins have contrived.
It is declared that for brahmins There are four kinds of downfalls:{M.20} “ ‘Stealing gold, drinking alcohol, Violating the guru’s wife, And murdering a brahmin.
These are the four downfalls for brahmins.
“ ‘Stealing gold is to be avoided, But any other theft is not.
When a brahmin steals gold, He thereby becomes a non-brahmin.
“ ‘Liquor should not be had, But any other drink as one likes.
When a brahmin drinks liquor, He thereby becomes a non-brahmin.
“ ‘The guru’s wife should not be gone to, But anyone else’s wife as one likes.
When a brahmin goes to his guru’s wife, He thereby becomes a non-brahmin.
“ ‘One should not kill a single brahmin, But any number of other people may be killed.
When a brahmin kills a brahmin, He thereby becomes a non-brahmin.
“ ‘Thus, these are said to be the four Kinds of downfalls for brahmins, Due to which they become non-brahmins.
It is held that anything else is not a downfall.
“ ‘When one commits any one of the four, One becomes a non-brahmin.
Within a congregation of brahmins, One will not receive any courtesy, And one will not be worthy of a seat and water, Nor will anyone respectfully stand up.
“ ‘However, brahmins have seen A remedy for one who has fallen: After having taken up an observance, He may reach brahminhood again.
“ ‘For an entire twelve years, He should wear a donkey skin, Carry upright a khaṭvāṅga staff, And eat from the skull of the deceased.
{M.21} “ ‘After having taken up this observance, Resolutely and uninterruptedly, Then, at the completion of the twelfth year, He may reach brahminhood again.
“ ‘Thus, a remedy was seen By brahmins who practice austerities, Who walk the wrong path, deluded, Who do not see what the remedy is.
“ ‘So I say this to you, brahmin, that it is a mere commonplace notion of people to speak of “brahmin,” “kṣatriya,” “vaiśya,” or “śūdra.”
Recognizing that all this is one and the same, please grant the brahmin maiden Prakṛti as wife for my son Śārdūlakarṇa.
I will bestow on you whatever dowry you have in mind.’
“Hearing these words from the outcaste king Triśaṅku, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin was deeply offended, upset, furious, and not at all pleased.
Full of anger, hostility, and resentment about it, he knit his brow into a three-pointed frown, {M.22} gasped and panted while rolling his eyes, and, having become red like a mongoose, said to the outcaste king Triśaṅku: “ ‘Not having looked at this properly, Inferior fellow, you have formed such a notion That there is only one kind in this world, Common to all, without any distinctions.
“ ‘How could you of the dog-cooking caste, Having been born from a lowly womb, Wish to completely defeat a brahmin Who is fully versed in the Vedas?
“ ‘Kings, O inferior fellow, are those who know how to distinguish properly, whether in regard to the law of the country, the law of the city, the law of the village, the law of the district, the law of dowries, the law of inviting for marriage, or the law of marriage, or in regard to past karma.
“ ‘These four, O inferior fellow, are the caste categories: brahmins, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, and śūdras.
According to their marriage laws, brahmins may have four kinds of wives: brahmin women, kṣatriya women, vaiśya women, and śūdra women.
Kṣatriyas may have three kinds of wives: kṣatriya women, vaiśya women, and śūdra women.
Vaiśyas may have two kinds of wives: vaiśya women and śūdra women.
Śūdras, however, may have one kind of wives: only śūdra women.
“ ‘Thus, O inferior fellow, brahmins have four kinds of sons: those born from brahmin women, kṣatriya women, vaiśya women, or śūdra women.
Kṣatriyas have three kinds of sons: those born from kṣatriya women, vaiśya women, or śūdra women.
Vaiśyas have two kinds of sons: those born from vaiśya women or śūdra women.
Śūdras, however, have only one kind of sons: those born from śūdra women.
“ ‘The brahmins, O inferior fellow, are sons of Brahmā—they are the sons born from his mouth.
Kṣatriyas are born from his chest and arms, vaiśyas from his waist, and śūdras from his legs and feet.
“ ‘It was by Brahmā, O inferior fellow, that this world and all its beings were created.
{M.23} “ ‘We are his foremost sons.
Next come the kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas are the third caste category, And the fourth are called śūdras.
“ ‘You, O inferior fellow, do not appear even in the fourth caste.
I am in the highest caste, the superior caste, the supreme caste, the preeminent caste.
And you actually expect a matrimonial connection?
Get lost, you inferior fellow, quickly! Do not insult me further!’
“Hearing these words from the brahmin Puṣkarasārin, the outcaste king Triśaṅku said, ‘Listen here, brahmin, to what I have to say.
It is said that it was by Brahmā that this world and all its beings were created.
And it is said: “ ‘ “We are his foremost sons.
Next come the kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas are the third caste category, And the fourth are called śūdras.”
“ ‘Yet human beings all have feet, legs, Hands, flesh, torsos, and backs— Since there is no distinction in any part of the body, The four caste categories do not exist.
“ ‘When there is any prominent distinction, Then tell me about it, as it is endorsed by you.
But when there is no prominent distinction, Then the four caste categories do not exist.
{M.24} “ ‘It is indeed just like childish boys Who are playing on the road.
As they squish together mud pies, They give them their own names: “ ‘ “This is milk, this is curd, This is meat, this is ghee.”
But it is not the case that by children’s speech Mud pies are in fact food.
“ ‘It is just so with the four caste categories That you speak about, O brahmin.
There is no logical sense To the naming of mud pies.
“ ‘Not by hair, not by ears, Not by head, not by eyes, Not by mouth, not by nose, Not by neck, not by arms, “ ‘Not by chest, not by sides, Not by back, not by stomach, Not by thighs, not by calves, Not by hands, feet, or nails, “ ‘Not by voice, not by complexion, Not by any body parts, nor by copulation, Is there any marked distinction Among all human beings.
“ ‘Just as among the other castes Each birth is due to the sex organs— It being the universal underlying cause— Why, then, do you think in terms of castes?
“ ‘And when human beings all have a head, A skeleton, skin, sense organs, and stomachs, Since there is no distinction by a single body part, It is not sensible to designate four caste categories.
“ ‘When there is any prominent distinction, Then tell me about it, as it is endorsed by you.
But when there is no prominent distinction here, It is not sensible to designate four caste categories.
{M.25} “ ‘If this is indeed a fallacy, then whatever is designated By you regarding the underlying basis is not sensible.
But listening to me, good sir, you must follow through What I think on this; you must listen to what is being said.
“ ‘I will speak to you about what is sensible in this, What is consistent or inconsistent, as it is being enjoined.
When there is a fallacy that is not sensible, I will tell you about it in further response, But listening to me, good sir, you must follow it through. Preeminent are human beings for whom the Dharma is sovereign.
“ ‘If inference is also authoritative to you, brahmin, then when you say that Brahmā is one, it would follow that his creatures are all of the same kind.
We are of the same kind when you say that it is by Brahmā that this world and all its beings were created.
And if, brahmin, you take this as authoritative, then it is not sensible, brahmin, for you to speak of four caste categories: brahmins, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, and śūdras.
“ ‘However, brahmin, if what I am saying is wrong, then, brahmin, we would have to concurrently discern a marked difference within humankind.
That is, we would have to discern a marked difference in heads, mouths, eyes, ears, noses, {M.26} brows, colors, bodily forms, bodily shapes, bodily appearances, organs of birth, food, and modes of birth.
“ ‘For instance, dear Puṣkarasārin, one discerns a marked difference between cows, horses, donkeys, dogs, camels, deer, birds, goats, and sheep and between those born from eggs, those born from wombs, those born from heat and moisture, and those born spontaneously.
That is to say, one discerns a marked difference in feet, in mouths, in colors, in bodily shapes, in food, and in organs of birth and modes of birth.
Yet between the four caste categories no such marked difference is discerned.
Therefore, all these are one and the same.
“ ‘Also, brahmin, among those sapwood trees, one discerns a marked difference between the mango, the black plum, the date, the jackfruit, the pomegranate, the persimmon, the grape, the citron, the wood apple, the candlenut, the coconut, the tiniśa, the karañja, and so on.
That is to say, one discerns a marked difference in roots, in trunks, in bark, in sapwood, in heartwood, in leaves, in flowers, and in fruits.
Yet between the four caste categories no such marked difference is discerned.
“ ‘Likewise, brahmin, among those dry-land trees, one discerns a marked difference between the sal tree, the tamāla tree, the naktamāla tree, the karṇikāra tree, the saptaparṇa tree, the śirīṣa tree, the kovidāra tree, the syandana tree, the sandalwood tree, the śiṃśapa tree, the eraṇḍa tree, the khadira tree, and so on.
That is to say, one discerns a marked difference in roots, in trunks, in bark, in sapwood, in heartwood, in leaves, in flowers, and in fruits.
Yet between the four caste categories no such marked difference is discerned.
“ ‘Likewise, dear Puṣkarasārin, among those milk-secreting trees, one discerns a marked difference between the udumbara tree, the plakṣa tree, the pipal tree, the banyan tree, the valguka tree, and so on.
That is to say, one discerns a marked difference in roots, in trunks, in bark, in sapwood, in heartwood, in leaves, in flowers, and in fruits.
Yet between the four caste categories no such marked difference is discerned.
“ ‘Likewise, dear Puṣkarasārin, also among those trees with medicinal fruits, one discerns a marked difference between the gooseberry tree, the harītakī tree, the vibhītakī tree, and the pharasaka tree, and also between other kinds of medicinal plants, herbs, and trees that grow in the countryside and in the mountains.
That is to say, one discerns a marked difference in roots, in trunks, {M.27} in sapwood, in heartwood, in leaves, in flowers, and in fruits.
Yet between the four caste categories no such marked difference is discerned.
“ ‘Likewise, brahmin, among flower-bearing trees that grow on dry land, one discerns a marked difference between the atimuktaka tree, the campaka tree, the pāṭala tree, the sumanā tree, the vārṣikā tree, the dhanuṣkārikā tree, and so on.
That is to say, one discerns a marked difference in form, in color, in fragrance, and in shape.
Yet between the four caste categories no such marked difference is discerned.
“ ‘Likewise, brahmin, among flowers that grow in water, one discerns a marked difference between the lotus, the blue water-lily, the white water-lily, the nicely fragrant water-lily, the softly fragrant water-lily, and so on.
That is to say, one discerns a marked difference in form, in color, in fragrance, and in shape.
Yet between the four caste categories no such marked difference is discerned, Puṣkarasārin, so as to say, “those are brahmins,” “those are kṣatriyas,” “those are vaiśyas,” and “those are śūdras.”
Therefore, all these are one and the same.
“ ‘I will speak to you about something else As it is conceived by brahmins: His head is the starry firmament; The vault of the sky is his belly.
“ ‘The mountains are his thighs, The earth’s surface his feet, The sun and the moon his eyes, The grasses and trees his body hair.
“ ‘It is said the rains are his tears, The rivers are his urine, And the oceans are his excrements; Such is Brahmā, lord of creatures.{M.28} “ ‘You must examine it by its intrinsic characteristic, brahmin.
When brahmins originate from Brahmā, then, by the same reason, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, and śūdras also originate from Brahmā.
“ ‘If being reborn were in reality like this, There would be a caste-based distinction— If brahmins proceed to the world of Brahmā And the three other castes do not go to heaven.
There would thus be a caste-based distinction. If it is not so, then the four caste categories do not exist.
“ ‘Because one who belongs to the fourth caste category Goes to heaven by having done good actions, As it is with the praised austerities of sages, There is nothing distinctive about the twice-born.
“ ‘If there were just one brahmin here, Who had two tongues and four ears, Four horns, many legs, and two heads, There would thus be a caste-based distinction.
{M.29} “ ‘Killing others while being full of desire, Thus causing harm in all sorts of ways, And at the same time condemning people’s actions— These are the unvirtuous deeds of brahmins.
“ ‘Fighting, arguing, and constantly quarreling, Brahmins came up with sacrificing cows.
Instilling fear with Atharvavedic ritual, Brahmins made up these mantras.
“ ‘Wishing to do evil, deceiving many people, Being dishonest, cunning, and crafty— Thus thinking about disadvantaging others— When would they thereby go to heaven?
“ ‘Those brahmins of intense austerities, fully disciplined, Who are always committed to vows and ethical conduct, Who are nonviolent and devoted to maintaining restraint— It is those brahmins who go to the city of Brahmā.
“ ‘One is the same in having bones and flesh, in having nails, And in having skin, sorrow, happiness, urine, and excrements.
Since there is no distinction by the five sense faculties, These four caste categories do not exist.
“ ‘Brahmin, it is like a man who had four sons and gave them the names Nandaka (“He Who Has Delight”), Jīvaka (“He Who Has Life”), Aśoka (“He Who Has No Sorrow”), and Śatāyus (“He Who Has a Lifespan of One Hundred”).
{M.30} And then, dear Puṣkarasārin, that man would think of his cherished sons that he who is called Nandaka delights, he who is called Jīvaka lives, he who is called Aśoka has no sorrow, and he who is called Śatāyus lives a hundred years.
“ ‘It is by name, brahmin, that a difference is discerned between them, not by birth.
Why is this?
Because, brahmin, a son is born to his father.
For that reason there is this explanation: “ ‘The mother being the vessel, a son is of the father; One is he by whom one is born.
If you recognize this to be the case, Then nowhere are they others.
“ ‘Examine it rightly, brahmin.
Who here is a “brahmin,” a “kṣatriya,” a “vaiśya,” or a “śūdra”?
“ ‘Among all, there are people with only one eye, People with hunched backs, and those with epilepsy.
Among each there are those with leprosy and those with vitiligo, Those who are fair skinned and those who are dark skinned.
“ ‘Those people are established as having marrow, nails, skin, torsos, stomachs, and faces by their own actions.
Thus, in transmigration, brahmin, there is no distinction.
What distinction is there based on birth?
Since there is no distinguishing by birth, the four caste categories do not at all exist.
{M.31} “ ‘Therefore I say to you, brahmin, that it is a mere commonplace notion of people to speak of “brahmin,” “kṣatriya,” “vaiśya,” “śūdra,” or “outcaste.”
This is one—all this is one and the same.
So please grant your daughter Prakṛti as wife for my son Śārdūlakarṇa.
I will bestow on you whatever dowry you have in mind.’
“Hearing these words from the outcaste king Triśaṅku, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin retorted, ‘Have you studied the Ṛgveda?
Have you studied the Yajurveda?
Have you studied the Sāmaveda?
Have you studied the Atharvaveda?
Have you studied Āyurveda?
And the study of ritual?
And the inner self? Have you studied the cycle of zodiacs, the groups of lunar asterisms, or the succession of lunar days?
Have you studied the cycle of karma?
Have you studied the auxiliary sciences, geomantic science, the science of propitiousness, or the science of auspices?
Have you studied the course of the eclipser Rāhu, the course of Śukra, or the course of the planets?
Have you studied worldly science, the exposition of commentaries, grammars, or the study of the lunar fortnights?’
{M.32} “At this, the outcaste king Triśaṅku replied to the brahmin Puṣkarasārin, ‘I have studied these, brahmin, and more still.
Brahmin, although you may say to yourself, “I am the one who has attained expertise in the mantras,” I will speak to you, brahmin, about inference in accordance with the Dharma.
For it is known, brahmin, that the people of the first times did not think in terms of “brahmin,” “kṣatriya,” “vaiśya,” or “śūdra.”
This is one—all this is one and the same.
“ ‘At that time, brahmin, as people were both similar and dissimilar, there were some people who tended, guarded, and harvested fields (kṣetra) of grain.
So the notion arose that “those are kṣatriyas.”
“ ‘Then, brahmin, some other people there thought, “Possession is sickness, possession is a boil, possession is a dart.
Let us abandon our possessions and go to a secluded place, build grass huts and leaf huts from grass, wood, branches, leaves, and foliage, and let us dwell inside in meditation.”
There, at daybreak, they would go on alms round to the village for the sake of food.
The people living in the village then thought, “Oh, these people are doing what is difficult indeed, having abandoned their possessions and having gone outside (bahirnirgata) of villages, towns, and inhabited provinces.”
So, in regard to them, the notion arose, “being outside minded (bahirmanaska), they are brahmins.”
And the village-dwelling people revered them greatly and honored them with whatever was to be given.
{M.33} “ ‘Then, some among those people, when they were not bringing about those meditative absorptions, descended into the villages and taught the words of mantras.
The village dwellers said of them, “These people are not all by themselves, they are teachers (adhyāpaka).”
So, in regard to them, the notion arose in the world that they are “teachers” (adhyāpaka). “ ‘This is the cause, this is the condition, that led to the appearance of brahmins in the world.
“ ‘Then, some people became engaged in work associated with distinct timings (vivekakāla) and associated with wealth in various ways (vividha).
So, in regard to them, the notion arose that they are “vaiśyas.”
“ ‘Then, some people crafted a livelihood through petty (kṣudra) labor.
So, in regard to them, the notion arose that they are “śūdras.”
“ ‘Long ago, brahmin, there was a certain person who took a wife, mounted a wagon, and went to some place of wilderness, where the wheel hub of their wagon broke.
That is why the notion arose of mātaṅga (“Do not go there”).
“ ‘For those who cultivated (karṣanti) the land (kṣetra), the notion of “cultivator” (karṣaka) was used. But there was one who delighted (rañjayati) the assembly with righteous speech, being proper in the conduct of precepts and vows. So, in regard to him, the notion of “king” (rājā) arose.
“ ‘After that, some people forged a livelihood through commerce (vāṇijyā).
So, in regard to them, the notion arose that they are “merchants” (vaṇij).
{M.34} “ ‘After that, some people went forth from home (pravrajanti). After going forth, they were victorious over the enemies (parān jayanti), that is, they were victorious over their mental afflictions.
So, in regard to them, the notion arose in the world that they are “ones who have gone forth” (pravrajita).
“ ‘Furthermore, brahmin, there is another notion that arose in the world. I will speak to you about it.
{M.35} “ ‘It was Brahmā who recited these Vedas in this world.
Brahmā is the greatest ascetic among the gods. He recited the Vedas to Indra Kauśika. Indra Kauśika recited the Vedas to Araṇemi Gautama. Araṇemi Gautama recited the Vedas to Śvetaketu.
Śvetaketu recited the Vedas to the paṇḍita Śuka.
The paṇḍita Śuka divided the Vedas into four, and so there was Puṣya of the Ṛgveda branch, Paṅkti of the Sāmaveda branch, the twenty-one of the Yajurveda branch, and Kratu of the Atharvaveda branch.
“ ‘The brahmins belonging to the Ṛgveda branch (bahuvṛca) all know many hymns (bahuvṛca).
From Puṣya having been the single one, it has divided into twenty-five, namely, the Śākalas, the Vāṣkalas, and the Māṇḍavyas—ten Śākalas, eight Vāṣkalas, and seven Māṇḍavyas.
This, brahmin, is the Ṛgveda branch: from Puṣya having been the single one, it has divided into twenty-five.
“ ‘Inference is also authoritative to you, brahmin.
The brahmins belonging to the Sāmaveda branch (chandoga) are all versed in chanting (chandoga).
From Paṅkti having been the single one, it has divided into one thousand eighty, namely, the Śīlavalkas, the Āruṇikas, the Laukākṣas, the Kauthumas, the Brahmasamas, the Mahāsamas, the Mahāyogikas, the Sātyamugras, and the Samantavedas.
{M.36} There are then twenty Śīlavalkas, twenty Āruṇikas, forty Laukākṣas, one hundred Kauthumas, one hundred Brahmasamas, five hundred Mahāsamas, one hundred Mahāyogikas, one hundred Sātyamugras, and one hundred Samantavedas.
This, brahmin, is the Sāmaveda branch: from Paṅkti having been the single one, it has divided into one thousand eighty.
“ ‘Inference is also authoritative to you, brahmin.
The brahmins belonging to the Yajurveda branch (adhvaryu) all perform the sacrificial rites (adhvaryu).
From having been twenty-one in number, it has divided into a hundred, namely, the Kaṭhas, the Kaṇimas, the Vājasaneyins, the Jātukarṇas, and the Proṣṭhapadas—ten Kaṭhas, ten Kaṇimas, eleven Vājasaneyins, thirteen Jātukarṇas, sixteen Proṣṭhapadas, and forty-one sages.
This, brahmin, is the Yajurveda branch: from having been twenty-one in number, it has divided into a hundred.
“ ‘Inference is also authoritative to you, brahmin.
The mantra specialists belonging to the Atharvaveda branch (ātharvaṇika) are all Atharvavedins (ātharvaṇika).
From Kratu having been the single one, it has divided into two. From having been twofold, it has divided into four.
From having been fourfold, it has divided into eight.
From having been eightfold, it has divided into ten.
This, brahmin, is the Atharvaveda branch: from Kratu having been the single one, it has divided into ten.
“ ‘Inference is also authoritative to you, brahmin.
These are the twelve hundred sixteen distinctions that were properly seen by brahmins of yore, whether in Vedic verse, grammar, worldly science, {M.37} or exegesis of words.
But no presumption or exclusion is known among them.
That is to say, knowing that they are of one caste, they are deemed worthy to become relatives.
Therefore I say to you, brahmin, that it is a mere commonplace notion of people to speak of “brahmin,” “kṣatriya,” “vaiśya,” or “śūdra.”
This is one—all this is one and the same.
So please grant your daughter Prakṛti as wife for my son Śārdūlakarṇa.
I will bestow on you whatever dowry you have in mind.’
“Hearing these words from the outcaste king Triśaṅku, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin became completely silent and embarrassed, and he stood there with drooping shoulders and head hung low, having nothing to say and absorbed in thought.
When the outcaste king Triśaṅku saw that the brahmin Puṣkarasārin had become completely silent and embarrassed, standing there with drooping shoulders and hung head low, having nothing to say and absorbed in thought, he further said to him, ‘You may think, brahmin, that there would be matrimonial ties with someone dissimilar.
But it should not be seen in this way by you, brahmin.
{M.38} Why is that?
Because my son Śārdūlakarṇa possesses the world’s most excellent qualities of knowing what is authoritative, of learning, ethical conduct, wisdom, and so forth.
“ ‘You may think, brahmin, that those who perform the vājapeya sacrifice and those who perform the aśvamedha sacrifice, the puruṣamedha sacrifice, the śamyāprāsa sacrifice, and the nirargaḍa sacrifice are all, after the breakup of their bodies, reborn in a good place, in a heavenly world, among the gods.
But it should not be seen in this way by you, brahmin.
Why is that?
While performing the vājapeya sacrifice, the aśvamedha sacrifice, the puruṣamedha sacrifice, the śamyāprāsa sacrifice, and the nirargaḍa sacrifice, they engage in killing living beings while reciting many kinds of mantras.
Therefore I say to you, brahmin, that this is not the way to heaven.
Let me explain to you, brahmin, the way to heaven.
Listen: “ ‘Anyone astute should keep ethical conduct When intent upon threefold happiness: Being praised, acquiring wealth, And, after passing away, enjoying in heaven.
“ ‘Hence, brahmin, those who previously performed the vājapeya sacrifice, the aśvamedha sacrifice, the puruṣamedha sacrifice, the śamyāprāsa sacrifice, and the nirargaḍa sacrifice grasped at sensory pleasure without inhibition.
Thus is heaven sought.
Hence, brahmin, those who will subsequently perform the vājapeya sacrifice, the aśvamedha sacrifice, the puruṣamedha sacrifice, the śamyāprāsa sacrifice, and the nirargaḍa sacrifice will senselessly commit enormous slaughter.
Therefore I say to you, brahmin, come! Forge matrimonial ties with me.
Why?
Because outcastes are not despicable by the Dharma.
Rather: {M.39} “ ‘Faith, ethical conduct, spiritual ardor, Giving away, learning, and thus wisdom, Contemplating all sacred knowledge, And observances for the sake of heaven— “ ‘Eightfold is the authoritative way to heaven, and it is held that by these eight ways one goes to heaven.
And these eight, brahmin, are taught to be the mother-like sisters who issue forth the world: Aditi, the mother of gods; Danu, the mother of demons; Ariṣṭā, the mother of gandharvas; Iḷā, the mother of rākṣasas; Surabhi, the mother of cattle; Vinatā, the mother of eagles; Kadru, the mother of nāgas; and Surasā, the mother of serpents— the sages, those who know generally but also specifically by various kinds of sacrificial rituals, mentally know them to belong to the great Kaśyapa.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, let me set forth the seven lineages of brahmins.
The Gautamas, the Vātsyas, the Kautsas, the Kauśikas, the Kāśyapas, the Vāsiṣṭhas, the Māṇḍavyas—these are the seven lineages of brahmins.
Each of these lineages has divided into seven.
Thus, among the Gautamas there are the Kauthumas, the Gargas, the Bharadvājas, the Ārṣṭiṣeṇas, the Vaikhānasas, {M.40} and the Vajrapādas.
Among the Vātsyas there are the Ātreyas, the Maitreyas, the Bhārgavas, the Sāvarṇyas, the Salīlas, and the Bahujātas.
Among the Kautsas there are the Maudgalyāyanas, the Gauṇāyanas, the Laṅgalas, the Lagnas, the Daṇḍalagnas, and the Somabhuvas.
Among the Kauśikas there are the Kātyāyanas, the Darbhakātyāyanas, the Valkalins, the Pakṣins, the Laukākṣas, and the Lohitāyanas.
Among the Kāśyapas there are the Maṇḍanas, the Iṣṭas, the Śauṇḍāyanas, the Rocaneyas, the Anapekṣas, and the Agniveśyas.
Among the Vāsiṣṭhas there are the Jātukarṇyas, the Dhānyāyanas, the Pārāśaras, the Vyāghranakhas, the Āṇḍāyanas, and the Aupamanyavas.
Among the Māṇḍavyas there are the Bhāṇḍāyanas, the Dhaumrāyaṇas, the Kātyāyanas, the Khalvavāhanas, the Sugandharāyaṇas, and the Kāpiṣṭhalāyanas.
“ ‘Brahmin, these are the forty-nine lineages, in Vedic verse, grammar, exegesis of words, or worldly science, properly seen by brahmins of yore.
And there are other lineages still.
But no presumption or exclusion is known among them.
That is to say, knowing that they are the same, you are deemed worthy to become relatives.
Therefore I say to you, brahmin, that it is a mere commonplace notion of people to speak of “brahmin,” “kṣatriya,” “vaiśya,” or “śūdra.”
All is one—all this is one and the same.
So please grant your daughter Prakṛti as wife for my son Śārdūlakarṇa.
I will bestow on you whatever dowry you have in mind.’
{M.41} “Hearing these words from the outcaste king Triśaṅku, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin remained completely silent and embarrassed, and he stood there with drooping shoulders and head hung low, having nothing to say and absorbed in thought.
When the outcaste king Triśaṅku saw that the brahmin Puṣkarasārin remained completely silent and embarrassed, standing there with drooping shoulders and head hung low, having nothing to say and absorbed in thought, he said: “ ‘As is the seed that is sown, So is the fruit that is obtained.
Since the lord of creatures is one, There is no distinction.
“ ‘It is stated that due to a difference in faculties A division in work activities is observed, But between a brahmin and another caste There is nothing that distinguishes them.
“ ‘It makes no sense to deem oneself elevated, To consider oneself superior here.
Brought about by semen and blood, Both equally come from the womb.
“ ‘I will speak to you about the four caste categories As one talks about the laws of domestic animals: Were you to have your sister as your wife, It would not be appropriate, brahmin.
“ ‘If indeed this world has been Engendered by Brahmā himself, Then brahmin women are the sisters of brahmins, And kṣatriya women are the sisters of kṣatriyas.
“ ‘Then vaiśya women are that of vaiśyas, Śūdra women that of śūdras.
A sister is not appropriate as one’s wife If she has been engendered by Brahmā.
“ ‘But beings are not born from Brahmā; They are born from mental afflictions and actions.
Each having different dispositions, Beings are seen to be either high or low.
“ ‘Due to their commonality of birth, Knowledge occurs equally In a brahmin, in a kṣatriya, In a vaiśya, and in a śūdra.{M.42} “ ‘There is the Ṛgveda, the Yajurveda, The Sāmaveda, the Atharvaveda, The epics, and the glossaries— Not to speak of metrics, which is without meaning— “ ‘And in our studies there is also the science Of loving kindness, of flaming, Of transporting, of moving, of immobilizing, And of taking any form one wants, “ ‘The Gāndhārī science to be swift as thought, The Gaurī science to psychically control, The science of reading the cawing of crows, And mantras, sorcery, and breaking spells.
“ ‘We have had men who were paṇḍitas Much renowned in the sciences, Sages who were gem-like flowers, And great sages who shone forth.
“ ‘They had attained the miraculous powers of deities.
Why would you put into question their knowledge, Thinking that outcastes are not educated, While brahmins are experts in the Vedas?
“ ‘The one who was born as Kapiñjalāda Was fully accomplished in mantras, Yet he was not the son of a brahmin woman.
So what do you think, brahmin?
{M.43} “ ‘The low-caste woman Kālī gave birth To a son, the sage Dvaipāyana, Who was fierce, radiant, daunting, and of great ardor And had the five higher knowledges Yet was not the son of a brahmin woman.
So what do you say, brahmin?
“ ‘The kṣatriya woman named Reṇukā Gave birth to the great sage Rāma, Who was a paṇḍita and well trained, Confident in all disciplines, Yet was not the son of a brahmin woman.
So what do you say, brahmin?
“ ‘And there have been those men Who possessed radiance and ardor, Who were paṇḍitas and well trained, Who were esteemed in the world as sages, Yet were not the sons of brahmin women.
So what do you say, brahmin?
“ ‘It is just a contrived notion of people That there are brahmins, kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas, and, after that, śūdras.
This is just a well-proclaimed notion.
“ ‘Therefore I say to you, brahmin, that it is a mere commonplace notion of people to speak of “brahmin,” “kṣatriya,” “vaiśya,” or “śūdra.”
This is one—all this is one and the same.
{M.44} So please grant your daughter Prakṛti as wife for my son Śārdūlakarṇa.
I will bestow on you whatever dowry you have in mind.’
“Hearing these words from the outcaste king Triśaṅku, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin asked him, ‘What is your family lineage?’
“ ‘I am of the Ātreya lineage,’ he said.
“ ‘What was it in the past?’
“ ‘Ātreya.’
“ ‘What is your Vedic school?’
“ ‘Kāleya-Maitrāyaṇīya.’
“ ‘How many lineages does it have?’
“ ‘Three lineages, namely, the Vātsyas, the Kautsas, and the Bharadvājas.’
“ ‘Who were your fellow students?’
“ ‘The Sāmavedins.’
“ ‘How many divisions of Sāmavedins are there?’
“ ‘Six.’
“ ‘Which are they?’
“ ‘The Kauthubhas, the Cārāyaṇīyas, the Lāṅgalas, the Sauvarcasas, the Kāpiñjaleyas, and the Ārṣṭiṣeṇas.’
“ ‘What is your lineage from your mother’s side?’
“ ‘Pārāśarīya.’
“ ‘Please speak on the Sāvitrī.
What is it like?
How many syllables does the Sāvitrī have?
How many parts?
How many metrical feet?’
“ ‘The Sāvitrī has twenty-four syllables, three parts, and eight metrical feet.’
“ ‘Please pronounce the Sāvitrī.’
“ ‘Well then, dear Puṣkarasārin, I will speak about the Sāvitrī together with its origin.
Please listen.’
“ ‘Please narrate it.’
“ ‘Long ago, brahmin, in a past time, there was a sage named Vasu.
He possessed the five higher knowledges, was fiercely radiant, had great power, and had attained the meditative absorptions.
Because of that, he obtained Takṣaka’s daughter, Kapilā, as his wife, and with a mind completely impassioned, he engaged in sexual intercourse with her.
Thus the sage {M.45} lost his miraculous power and strayed from his meditative absorptions.
Being full of remorse and reproaching himself for his bad conduct, on that occasion he uttered this mantra: Oṃ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ | Tat savitur vareṇyaṃ bhargo devasya dhīmahi | Dhiyo yo naḥ pracodayāt || “ ‘Having thus unintentionally created it, brahmin, he recited the mantra day and night.
This is the Sāvitrī of brahmins.
“ ‘In a previous lifetime, the lord of creatures resided within a dense forest, having matted hair and being of ardent practice.
Dwelling in deep seclusion, he was in rapture there: Vayaṃ devasya śreṣṭhakaṃ bhojanam upa­namyānu­pradāsyāmaḥ || “ ‘This is the Sāvitrī of kṣatriyas.
Oṃ citraṃ hi dadhe vaiśyakanyakā | Atha sā kanyā arthataḥ pravīṇā ||{M.46} “ ‘This is the Sāvitrī of vaiśyas.
Oṃ atapaḥ pratapaḥ | Jīve-d-ahaṃ varṣaśataṃ | Paśye-d-ahaṃ śaradāṃ śataṃ || “ ‘This is the Sāvitrī of śūdras.
Oṃ kāmā hi loke paramāḥ prajānāṃ Teṣāṃ aprahāṇe bhūtāntarāyāḥ | Tasmād bhavantaḥ prajahantu kāmān Tato’tulaṃ prāpsyatha brahmalokaṃ || “ ‘Thus, brahmin, this Sāvitrī was spoken by Brahmā, lord of this Sahā world, at which the perfectly awakened ones of the past then rejoiced.’
“ ‘Dear Triśaṅku, please speak on the succession of lunar asterisms.
How is it?
Please describe it.’
“ ‘Please listen, dear Puṣkarasārin, and I will describe the succession of lunar asterisms.
It is as follows: Kṛttikā, Rohiṇī, Mṛgaśirā, Ārdrā, Punarvasu, Puṣya, Aśleṣā, Maghā, Pūrvaphalgunī, Uttaraphalgunī, Hastā, Citrā, Svātī, Viśākhā, Anurādhā, Jyeṣṭhā, Mūlā, Pūrvāṣāḍhā, Uttarāṣāḍhā, Abhijit, Śravaṇā, Dhaniṣṭhā, Śatabhiṣā, Pūrvabhādrapadā, Uttarabhādrapadā, Revatī, Aśvinī, and Bharaṇī.
“ ‘These, dear Puṣkarasārin, are the twenty-eight lunar asterisms.’
“ ‘How many stars do they have?
What shapes do they have?
How many muhūrtas do they last?
What are their foods?
What are their deities? What are their lineages?’
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, the Kṛttikā asterism has six stars.
It has the shape of a razor.
Its conjunction with the moon lasts thirty muhūrtas.
{M.47} It has curdled milk as its food.
It has Agni as its presiding deity.
And it is Vaiśyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Rohiṇī asterism has five stars.
It has the shape of a two-wheeled cart.
Its conjunction lasts forty-five muhūrtas.
It has deer meat as its food.
It has Prajāpati as its presiding deity.
And it is Bharadvāja by lineage.
“ ‘The Mṛgaśirā asterism has three stars.
It has the shape of a deer’s head.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has fruits and roots as its food.
It has the moon as its presiding deity.
And it is Mṛgāyaṇīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Ārdrā asterism has one star.
It has the shape of a dot.
Its conjunction lasts fifteen muhūrtas.
It has the cream of ghee as its food.
It has the Spear Holder as its presiding deity.
And it is Hārītāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Punarvasu asterism has two stars.
It has the shape of a foot.
Its conjunction lasts forty-five muhūrtas.
It has honey as its food.
It has Aditi as its presiding deity.
And it is Vāsiṣṭha by lineage.
“ ‘The Puṣya asterism has three stars.
It has the shape of a dish.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has the cream of honey as its food.
It has Bṛhaspati as its presiding deity.
And it is Aupamanyavīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Aśleṣā asterism has one star.
It has the shape of a dot.
Its conjunction lasts fifteen muhūrtas.
It has rice porridge as its food.
It has the Serpent as its presiding deity.
And it is Maitrāyaṇīya by lineage. “ ‘These, dear Puṣkarasārin, are the seven lunar asterisms belonging to the eastern quarter.
“ ‘The Maghā asterism {M.48} has five stars.
It has the shape of a river bend.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has sesame and rice meal as its food.
It has the ancestors as its presiding deity.
And it is Piṅgalāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Pūrvaphalgunī asterism has two stars.
It has the shape of a foot.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has bilva as its food.
It has Bhaga as its presiding deity.
And it is Gautamīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Uttaraphalgunī asterism has two stars.
It has the shape of a foot.
Its conjunction lasts forty-five muhūrtas.
It has wheat and fish as its food.
It has Aryaman as its presiding deity.
And it is Kauśika by lineage.
“ ‘The Hastā asterism has five stars.
It has the shape of a hand.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has millet as its food.
It has the sun as its presiding deity.
And it is Kāśyapa by lineage.
“ ‘The Citrā asterism has one star.
It has the shape of a dot.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has mung khichri, ghee, and pūpa cake as its food.
It has Tvaṣṭṛ as its presiding deity.
And it is Kātyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Svātī asterism has one star.
It has the shape of a dot.
Its conjunction lasts fifteen muhūrtas.
It has mung khichri and fruits as its food.
It has Vāyu as its presiding deity.
And it is Kātyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Viśākhā asterism has two stars.
{M.49} It has the shape of a horn.
Its conjunction lasts forty-five muhūrtas.
It has sesame flowers as its food.
It has Indra and Agni as its presiding deity.
And it is Śāṅkhāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘These, dear Puṣkarasārin, are the seven lunar asterisms belonging to the southern quarter.
“ ‘The Anurādhā asterism has four stars.
It has the shape of a pearl necklace.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has liquor and meat as its food.
It has Mitra as its presiding deity.
And it is Ālambāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Jyeṣṭhā asterism has three stars.
It has the shape of a barleycorn.
Its conjunction lasts fifteen muhūrtas.
It has gruel as its food.
It has Indra as its presiding deity.
And it is Dīrghakātyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Mūlā asterism has seven stars.
It has the shape of a scorpion.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has roots and fruits as its food.
It has Nairṛti as its presiding deity.
And it is Kātyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Pūrvāṣāḍhā asterism has four stars.
It has the shape of a cow’s hoofprint.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has banyan sap as its food.
It has Toya as its presiding deity.
And it is Darbhakātyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Uttarāṣāḍhā asterism has four stars.
It has the shape of an elephant’s footprint.
Its conjunction lasts forty-five muhūrtas.
It has honey and parched grain as its food.
It has Viśva as its presiding deity.
And it is Maudgalyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Abhijit asterism has three stars.
It has the shape of a cow’s head.
Its conjunction lasts six muhūrtas.
{M.50} It has air as its food.
It has Brahmā as its presiding deity.
And it is Brahmāvatīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Śravaṇā asterism has three stars.
It has the shape of a barleycorn.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has bird meat as its food.
It has Viṣṇu as its presiding deity.
And it is Trikātyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘These, dear Puṣkarasārin, are the seven lunar asterisms belonging to the western quarter.
“ ‘The Dhaniṣṭhā asterism has four stars.
It has the shape of a bird.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has horse gram as its food.
It has Vasu as its presiding deity.
And it is Kauṇḍinyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Śatabhiṣā asterism has one star.
It has the shape of a dot.
Its conjunction lasts fifteen muhūrtas.
It has gruel as its food.
It has Varuṇa as its presiding deity.
And it is Tāṇḍyāyanīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Pūrvabhādrapadā asterism has two stars.
It has the shape of a foot.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has meat and blood as its food.
It has Ahirbudhnya as its presiding deity.
And it is Jātūkarṇya by lineage.
“ ‘The Uttarabhādrapadā asterism has two stars.
It has the shape of a foot.
{M.51} Its conjunction lasts forty-five muhūrtas.
It has meat as its food.
It has Aryaman as its presiding deity.
And it is Dhyānadrāhyāyaṇīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Revatī asterism has one star.
It has the shape of a dot.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has curdled milk as its food.
It has Pūṣa as its presiding deity.
And it is Aṣṭabhaginīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Aśvinī asterism has two stars.
It has the shape of a horse’s head.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has honey and rice porridge as its food.
It has Gandharva as its presiding deity.
And it is Maitrāyaṇīya by lineage.
“ ‘The Bharaṇī asterism has three stars.
It has the shape of a vulva.
Its conjunction lasts thirty muhūrtas.
It has sesame and threshed rice as its food.
It has Yama as its presiding deity.
And it is Bhārgavīya by lineage.
“ ‘These, dear Puṣkarasārin, are the seven lunar asterisms belonging to the northern quarter.
“ ‘Of the twenty-eight asterisms, dear Puṣkarasārin, six asterisms are in conjunction for forty-five muhūrtas, namely, Rohiṇī, Punarvasu, Uttaraphalgunī, Viśākhā, Uttarāṣāḍhā, and Uttarabhādrapadā.
Five asterisms are in conjunction for fifteen muhūrtas, namely, Ārdrā, Aśleṣā, Svātī, Jyeṣṭhā, and Śatabhiṣā.
Abhijit is alone in being in conjunction for six muhūrtas.
The remaining ones are in conjunction for thirty muhūrtas.
{M.52} “ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, of the seven asterisms belonging to the eastern quarter, Kṛttikā comes first and Aśleṣā last.
Of the seven asterisms belonging to the southern quarter, Maghā comes first and Viśākhā last.
Of the seven asterisms belonging to the western quarter, Anurādhā comes first and Śravaṇā last.
Of the seven asterisms belonging to the northern quarter, Dhaniṣṭhā comes first and Bharaṇī last.
“ ‘Of the twenty-eight asterisms, dear Puṣkarasārin, seven are powerful.
Which seven?
The three eastern ones, as well as Viśākhā, Anurādhā, Punarvasu, and Svātī.
Three are harsh: Ārdrā, Aśleṣā, and Bharaṇī.
Four are to be honored through offerings: the three northern ones and Rohiṇī.
Five are gentle: Śravaṇā, Dhaniṣṭhā, Śatabhiṣā, Jyeṣṭhā, and Mūlā.
Five are to be supported: Hastā, Citrā, Revatī, Maghā, and Abhijit.
Four are to be acted upon quickly: Kṛttikā, Mṛgaśirā, Puṣya, and Aśvinī.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, the twenty-eight asterisms have three progressions: the bull-following progression, the calf-following progression, and the joint progression.
When the asterism proceeds with the moon behind it, this is called the bull-following progression.
When the moon proceeds with the asterism behind it, this is called the calf-following progression.
When both the moon and the asterism proceed jointly, this is called the joint progression.
{M.53} “ ‘Now, dear Puṣkarasārin, I will speak about the celestial bodies.
Listen!
They are Śukra, Bṛhaspati, Śanaiścara, Budha, Aṅgāraka, Rāhu, Ketu, the sun, and the moon.
“ ‘As the world thus turns, how long are the days and nights during the assigned asterisms?
It is said that in the second month of winter, in the Rohiṇī asterism, on the eighth day, the day has twelve muhūrtas and the night has eighteen muhūrtas.
In the last month of summer, in the Rohiṇī asterism, on the eighth day, the day has eighteen muhūrtas and the night has twelve muhūrtas.
In the last month of the rainy season, in the Rohiṇī asterism, on the eighth day, the day has fourteen muhūrtas and the night has sixteen muhūrtas.’
“ ‘Dear Triśaṅku, when does a day and night begin?’
“ ‘On the daytime of a day.’ “ ‘When does a lunar fortnight {M.54} begin?’
“ ‘From pratipad.’
“ ‘When does a year begin?’
“ ‘With Pauṣa.’ “ ‘When do the seasons begin?’ “ ‘With the rainy season.’
“ ‘Dear Triśaṅku, what is the duration of a kṣaṇa? What is that of a lava?
What is that of a muhūrta?’
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, the time it takes for a woman to make one spin on a spinning wheel, neither too long nor too short—such is the duration of a tatkṣaṇa.
One hundred twenty of such tatkṣaṇas make one kṣaṇa.
Sixty kṣaṇas make one lava.
Thirty lavas make one muhūrta.
And by this sequence one day and night consists of thirty muhūrtas.
“ ‘The names of the muhūrtas are as follows.
When the sun rises and the shadow measures ninety-six human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Caturojā.
When the shadow measures sixty human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Śveta.
When the shadow measures twelve human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Samṛddha.
When the shadow measures six human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Śarapatha.
{M.55} When the shadow measures five human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Atisamṛddhi.
When the shadow measures four human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Udgata.
When the shadow measures three human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Sumukha.
At noon it is the muhūrta called Vajraka.
Right after, it is the muhūrta called Rākṣasa.
In the afternoon, when the shadow measures three human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Rohita.
When the shadow measures four human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Bala.
When the shadow measures five human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Vijaya.
When the shadow measures six human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Sarvarasa.
When the shadow measures twelve human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Vasu.
When the shadow measures sixty human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Sundara.
When the sun sets and the shadow measures ninety-six human lengths, it is the muhūrta called Parabhaya.
These are the muhūrtas during daytime.
“ ‘Now, dear Puṣkarasārin, let me set forth the muhūrtas during nighttime.
When the sun has set, it is the muhūrta called Raudra.
Then it is the muhūrta called Tārāvacara, then the muhūrta called Saṃyama, {M.56} then the muhūrta called Sāṃpraiyaka, then the muhūrta called Ananta, then the muhūrta called Gardabha, and then the muhūrta called Rākṣasa.
At midnight it is the muhūrta called Avayava.
After the passing of midnight it is the muhūrta called Brahmā.
Then it is the muhūrta called Diti, then the muhūrta called Arka, then the muhūrta called Vidhamana, then the muhūrta called Āgneya, then the muhūrta called Ātapāgni, and then the muhūrta called Abhijit.
These are the muhūrtas during nighttime.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, these are the thirty muhūrtas that are known to make a day and a night.
“ ‘As regards tatkṣaṇa, kṣaṇa, lava, and muhūrta, a thirtieth part of a muhūrta is a lava.
A sixtieth part of a lava is a kṣaṇa.
A hundred-and-twentieth part of a kṣaṇa is a tatkṣaṇa.
And the time it takes for a woman to make one spin on the spinning wheel, neither too long nor too short, is the duration of a tatkṣaṇa.
A hundred-and-twenty tatkṣaṇas make one kṣaṇa.
Sixty kṣaṇas make one lava.
Thirty lavas make one muhūrta.
By this sequence, thirty muhūrtas make one day and night.
Thirty days and nights make one month.
Twelve months make one year.
Caturojā, Śveta, Samṛddha, Śarapatha, Atisamṛddhi, Udgata, {M.57} Sumukha, Vajraka, Rohita, Bala, Vijaya, Sarvarasa, Vasu, Sundara, Parabhaya, Raudra, Tārāvacara, Saṃyama, Sāṃpraiyaka, Ananta, Gardabha, Rākṣasa, Avayava, Brahmā, Diti, Arka, Vidhamana, Āgneya, Ātapāgni, and Abhijit—these are the names of the muhūrtas.
“ ‘Brahmin, let me also speak to you on the derivation of time.
Please listen. “ ‘How is time measured?
It is said that two blinks of the eye make one lava.
Eight lavas make one kāṣṭhā.
Sixteen kāṣṭhās make one kalā.
Thirty kalās make one nāḍikā.
And two nāḍikās make one muhūrta.
“ ‘How is a nāḍikā measured?
It is said that one takes a bucket containing two hundred palas of water.
How big is the hole for the tube?
It is the size of one gold coin. On it one places a golden tube that is four fingers long.
{M.58} The circumference should be completely round from all four corners.
When the water has thus gone out of the vessel, one nāḍikā has elapsed.
By this measurement of a nāḍikā, two individual nāḍikās make one muhūrta.
By this, dear brahmin, thirty muhūrtas make one day and night.
“ ‘So sixteen blinks of the eye make one kāṣṭhā.
Sixteen kāṣṭhās make one kalā.
Sixty-four kalās make one muhūrta.
Thirty muhūrtas make one day and night.
Thirty days and nights make one month.
Twelve months make one year, which thus measures 165,888,000 blinks of the eye.
By this, brahmin, the derivation of time has been explained.
“ ‘Please listen, brahmin, to the derivation of the krośa and the yojana.
Seven paramāṇu make one aṇu.
Seven aṇus appear as the minutest of all, an airborne dust particle.
Seven such dust particles make one speck of dirt on a hare.
Seven specks of dirt on a hare make one speck of dirt on a sheep.
Seven specks of dirt on a sheep make one speck of dirt on a cow.
Seven specks of dirt on a cow make one louse egg.
Seven louse eggs make one louse.
Seven lice make one grain of barley.
Seven grains of barley make one finger width.
Twelve finger widths make a hand span.
Two hand spans make one cubit.
Four cubits make one bow.
One thousand bows make one krośa.
Four krośas make one Magadhan yojana.{M.59} The length of 24,290,001,200,000 paramāṇus is the measure of a yojana.
“ ‘Please listen, brahmin, to the derivation of the measure of weight for gold.
Twelve grains of barley make one māṣaka.
Sixteen māṣakas make one karṣa.
The weight of gold is thereby assessed.
One karṣa weighs as much as 20,025,508 paramāṇus.
This, brahmin, is the derivation of the measure of weight for gold.
“ ‘Please listen, brahmin, to the derivation of the measure of weight of a pala.
Sixty-four māṣakas is the weight of one Magadhan pala.
With Magadhan scales the weight of a pala is thus assessed.
The weight of 84,707,280 paramāṇus, brahmin, is the measure of weight of a pala.
“ ‘Please listen, brahmin, to the derivation of the measure for liquids.
Twenty-four palas make one Magadhan prastha, the measure for liquids.
With Magadhan scales the measure of a prastha is thus assessed.
The weight of 2,032,974,720{M.60} paramāṇus, brahmin, is the derivation of the measure for liquids.
“ ‘Please listen, brahmin, to the derivation of the measure for grains.
Twenty-nine palas and one karṣa make one Magadhan prastha, the measure for grains.
With Magadhan scales the measure of a prastha is thus assessed.
The weight of 1,588,261,530 paramāṇus, brahmin, is the measure for grains.’
“ ‘Now, dear Triśaṅku, please deliver the lecture on prognostication on the basis of the asterisms.’
“ ‘Well then, dear brahmin, let me set forth the lecture on prognostication on the basis of the asterisms.
Please listen. {M.61} “ ‘Brahmin, a person born under Kṛttikā will be reputable.
A person born under Rohiṇī will have good fortune and prosperity.
A person born under Mṛgaśirā will be disposed to fighting.
A person born under Ārdrā will be a fountain of food and drink.
A person born under Punarvasu will be a farmer and cowherd.
A person born under Puṣya will be of ethical conduct.
A person born under Aśleṣā will be lustful and enthusiastic.
A person born under Maghā will be intelligent and great hearted.
A person born under Pūrvaphalgunī will have a short life.
A person born under Uttaraphalgunī will practice fasting and be intent on heaven.
A person born under Hasta will be a thief.
A person born under Citrā will be expert in dancing and singing and will know how to wear adornments.
A person born under Svātī will be proficient in calculations and could be a minister of finance.
A person born under Viśākhā will be in service of the king.
A person born under Anurādhā will be a merchant involved in merchandise.
A person born under Jyeṣṭhā will have a short life and little wealth.
A person born under Mūlā will have sons and be reputable.
A person born under Pūrvāṣāḍhā will be a spiritual practitioner.
A person born under Uttarāṣāḍhā will be of high descent and a lord of votaries.
A person born under Abhijit will be a famous person.
A person born under Śravaṇā {M.62} will be honored by the king.
A person born under Dhaniṣṭhā will be wealthy and rich.
A person born under Śatabhiṣā will be a mūlika.
A person born under Pūrvabhādrapadā will be a leader of robbers.
A person born under Uttarabhādrapadā will have a pleasant fragrance and will be a musician.
A person born under Revatī will be a boatman.
A person born under Aśvinī will trade in horses.
A person born under Bharaṇī will be an executioner.
“ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on prognostication on the basis of the asterisms.’
“ ‘Now, dear Triśaṅku, please deliver the lecture on predictions on the basis of the asterisms.’
“ ‘Well then, dear Puṣkarasārin, let me set forth the lecture on predictions on the basis of the asterisms. Please listen.
“ ‘When it is founded under Kṛttikā, A city will blaze with splendor, And one may predict that the city Will be ablaze with abundant jewels.
“ ‘When it is founded under Rohiṇī, One may predict that the city Will have people who are righteous And in possession of abundant wealth.
Naturally endowed with knowledge, They will be content with their spouses.
“ ‘When it is founded under Mṛgaśirā, It will be filled with women, cows, and riches And with garlands and enjoyments, And it will be attended by marvels.
{M.63} “ ‘When it is founded under Ārdrā, A city will have fish and meat And riches to partake of and enjoy, But it will have cruel people who are stupid by nature.
“ ‘When it is founded under Punarvasu, A city will shine forth with splendor, But after having abundant riches and grains, It will fall into complete ruin.
“ ‘When it is founded under splendid Puṣya, Wretched people will settle there, And, being in possession of splendor, They will be very righteous and have long lives.
“ ‘They will possess radiance, a long lifespan, And riches, grains, and flavors, And there the trees flourish quickly, Over and over again.
“ ‘When it is founded under Aśleṣā, Lowly people will live there, Unfortunate and fond of strife, Of poor conduct and unhappy.
“ ‘When it is founded under Maghā, People born there will be knowledgeable, Very rich, contented with their spouses, And very enterprising and bold.
{M.64} “ ‘When it is founded under Pūrvaphalgunī, A city will have women, garlands, Foods and garments, all very agreeable, As well as fragrant grains.
“ ‘When it is founded under Uttaraphalgunī, A city will have grains and riches, But the foolish people there Will be ruled over by the women.
“ ‘When it is founded under Hastā, People will be knowledgeable and very rich, They will take delight in one another, And there will be sleeping places in city.
“ ‘When it is founded under Citrā, All people will be ruled over by the women, And one may predict that the city Will be splendid, beautiful, and blazing.
“ ‘When it is founded under Svātī, People will accumulate abundant wealth, And the covetous, cruel, and foolish Will be abundant in that city.
“ ‘When it is founded under Viśākhā, A city will blaze with splendor, Filled with people making offerings, But it will come to an end through arms.
“ ‘When it is founded under Anurādhā, People will be of righteous conduct, their senses in check.
They will be content with their spouses And bent on prayers and oblations.
{M.65} “ ‘When it is founded under Jyeṣṭhā, It will be full of people who possess many jewels And riches and who know the Vedas, And it will flourish perpetually.
“ ‘When it is founded under Mūlā, A city will be endowed with grains and riches But crowded with people of poor conduct, And it will fall into ruin and turn to dust.
“ ‘When it is founded under Pūrvāṣāḍhā, A city will enjoy riches and grains, But the lowly people who live there Will be covetous, cruel, and foolish.
“ ‘When it is founded under Uttarāṣāḍhā, People will accumulate riches and grains, They will be naturally endowed with knowledge, And they will be fond of discussion and strife. “ ‘When it is founded under Abhijit, All the people in that city Will always be glad and cheerful, And they will be loving toward one another.
“ ‘When it is founded under Śravaṇā, The city will be endowed with grains and riches, And one may predict that it will be inhabited Mostly by people who are healthy.
“ ‘When it is founded under Dhaniṣṭhā, One may foretell that the city will be ruled by the women, And people will have abundant clothes and garlands While being free from sensual desire and enjoyment.
“ ‘When it is founded under Śatabhiṣā, People will be fond of stupidity and deceit And addicted to women and alcohol, And it will be destroyed by floods.
{M.66} “ ‘When it is founded under Pūrvabhādrapadā, People will be fond of pleasure there, And beings fools they will cause pain for others, Not being free from pride and sensual desire.
“ ‘When it is founded under Uttarabhādrapadā, One may predict perpetual unsurpassed growth. It will be replete with riches and grains, And it will be rich with jewels.
“ ‘When it is founded under Revatī, People will be very beautiful there.
There will be donkeys, camels, and cows, And it will be abundant in riches and grains.
“ ‘When it is founded under Aśvinī, One may foretell that the city will be propitious. It will be filled with healthy people And teeming with beautiful people.
“ ‘When it is founded under Bharaṇī, The lowly people who live there Will be unfortunate, fond of strife, Of poor conduct, and unhappy.
“ ‘Only after examining cities, kingdoms, and houses In connection with the asterisms does a discerning person Settle in them, once they are approved and commended— This is what I have learned in a previous lifetime.
{M.67} “ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on predictions on the basis of the asterisms.
“ ‘Now, dear Puṣkarasārin, let me set forth the lecture on the abodes of the asterisms.
Please listen.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, Kṛttikā is the asterism of the people of Kaliṅga and Magadha.
Rohiṇī is the asterism of all people.
Mṛgaśirā is the asterism of the people of Videha and of royal servants, as are Ārdrā, Punarvasu, and Puṣya.
Aśleṣā is the asterism of nāgas and the people of the Himālayas.
Maghā is the asterism of the people of Gauḍa.
Pūrvaphalgunī is the asterism of thieves.
Uttaraphalgunī is the asterism of the people of Avantī.
Hastā is the asterism of the people of Surāṣṭra.
Citrā is the asterism of birds and bipeds.
Svātī is the asterism of all who have gone forth.
Viśākhā is the asterism of those who live by the water.
Anurādhā is the asterism of merchants and carters.
Jyeṣṭhā is the asterism of doorkeepers.
{M.68} Mūlā is the asterism of caravan leaders.
Pūrvāṣāḍhā is the asterism of the Bāhlīkas.
Uttarāṣāḍhā is the asterism of the people of Kamboja.
Abhijit is the asterism of the people of the southern region and the people of Tāmraparṇa.
Śravaṇā is the asterism of gamblers and thieves.
Dhaniṣṭhā is the asterism of the people of Kuru and those of Pañcāla.
Śatabhiṣā is the asterism of maulikas and Atharvavedins.
Pūrvabhādrapadā is the asterism of the people of Gandhāra and the asterism of Yavanas and the people of Kamboja.
Uttarabhādrapadā is the asterism of gandharvas.
Revatī is the asterism of boatmen.
Aśvinī is the asterism of horse traders.
And Bharaṇī is the asterism of the people of Bharukaccha.
“ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on the abodes of the asterisms.’
“ ‘Now, dear Triśaṅku, please deliver the lecture on the rains in the season.’
“ ‘Well then, dear Puṣkarasārin, let me speak on the rains in the season.
Please listen. “ ‘When it begins to rain under Kṛttikā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas. It will rain for ten days.
If the first raindrops of the rainy period fall during Pūrvabhādrapadā and Uttarabhādrapadā in conjunction with Śravaṇā, it will bring forth rains afterward.
And in the winter season and the hot season {M.69} there will be three risks: the peril of fires, the peril of arms, and the peril of floods.
This is said of rains under Kṛttikā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Rohiṇī in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of twenty-one āḍhakas.
The lower lands should be cultivated then, and the higher lands should be left alone. The rainy season will be an impediment to the pith, but it will fully yield crops.
Two diseases will be predominant: stomach sickness and eye disease.
And the regions will have many thieves.
This is said of rains under Rohiṇī. “ ‘When it begins to rain under Mṛgaśirā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas. The rainy season will be an impediment to the pith, but it will bring forth rain afterward. {M.70} Kings will lay down their arms.
Regions will be at peace and well governed, and the populace will be joyous.
This is said of rains under Mṛgaśirā. “ ‘When it begins to rain under Ārdrā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of eighteen āḍhakas. The lower lands should be cultivated then, the higher lands should be left alone, and treasuries should be guarded. The regions will have many thieves, and kings will lay down their arms.
Three diseases will be predominant: fever, difficult breathing, and a constricted throat.
Infants and children will die.
This is said of rains under Ārdrā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Punarvasu in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of ninety āḍhakas. It will give rise to great rainclouds. When it has entered the month of Āṣāḍha, it will rain mildly, but it will rain incessantly and without interruption, and kings will lay down their arms.
This is said of rains under Punarvasu.
{M.71} “ ‘When it begins to rain under Puṣya in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of thirty-two āḍhakas.
The lower lands should be cultivated then, and the higher lands should be left alone.
There will certainly be heavy rains, and it will fully yield crops.
Brahmins and kṣatriyas will come into conflict.
Tuskers will be predominant, and there will be three sicknesses: boils, pustules, and scabs.
This is said of rains under Puṣya.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Aśleṣā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of twenty-one āḍhakas. The lower lands should be cultivated then, and the higher lands should be left alone.
Rough winds will blow, and at that time kings who know will be agitated. Its rain will fully yield all crops.
Wives and husbands, kings and ministers, will come into conflict.
This is said of rains under Aśleṣā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Maghā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas. {M.72} The rains will fully yield all crops.
Wild animals, birds, cattle, and people will have miscarriages, and at that time people will die.
This is said of rains under Maghā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Pūrvaphalgunī in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas.
The rains will fully yield all crops, but after producing that harvest, the people will be oppressed by an enemy army and will not enjoy it happily. At that time, the pregnancies of cattle and people will not go well.
This is said of rains under Pūrvaphalgunī. “ ‘When it begins to rain under Uttaraphalgunī in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of eighty āḍhakas. The rains will fully yield all crops, and at that time kings will lay down their arms.
Brahmins and kṣatriyas will come into conflict, and people without proper conduct will quickly go to ruin.
This is said of rains under Uttaraphalgunī.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Hastā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of forty-nine āḍhakas.
{M.73} The gods will then quit.
People will have failed crops with no juice in them and that do not stand high, and have little pith and water. At that time there will be a famine. This is said of rains under Hastā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Citrā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas.
There will be an impediment to the pith, but afterward it will bring forth rain. Kings will lay down their arms, and at that time the populace will be joyous.
This is said of rains under Citrā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Svātī in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of twenty-one āḍhakas.
Kings will lay down their arms, and at that time there will be more powerful thieves.
This is said of rains under Svātī.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Viśākhā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of eighty āḍhakas.
{M.74} The rains will fully yield all crops, and at that time kings will have weaknesses.
Wildfires will become widespread, and even strong tuskers will perish.
This is said of rains under Viśākhā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Anurādhā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty āḍhakas. The rains will fully yield all crops, and at that time the leaves will be solid.
This is said of rains under Anurādhā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Jyeṣṭhā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixteen āḍhakas. Agricultural activities should then be suspended. Yoke straps should be avoided, and one should hold back one’s grains and refrain from fires.
Ploughs should be withheld. The country will certainly go to ruin. It will be oppressed by an enemy army.
This is said of rains under Jyeṣṭhā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Mūlā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas. {M.75} The rains will fully yield crops.
At that time the regions will have many thieves, and three diseases will be strong: gout, pleurisy, and eye disease.
Flowers and fruits will flourish, and kings will lay down their arms.
This is said of rains under Mūlā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Pūrvāṣāḍhā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty āḍhakas. There will be two seizures then, during the lunar fortnight in either the month of Proṣṭhapada or the month of Aśvayuja.
The rains will fully yield all crops, and two illnesses will be predominant then: stomach sickness and eye disease.
This is said of rains under Pūrvāṣāḍhā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Uttarāṣāḍhā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of a full hundred āḍhakas. The higher lands should then be cultivated, and the lower lands should be left alone.
At that time great streams will flow; the highest amount of water rains down then, yielding all crops.
Three illnesses will be predominant: boils, pustules, and throat disease.
This is said of rains under Uttarāṣāḍhā. “ ‘When it begins to rain under Abhijit in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas.
{M.76} It will rain all over the country, and afterward the rains will bring forth crops.
There will be an upsurge of water animals. This is said of rains under Abhijit.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Śravaṇā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas. It will rain all over the country, and afterward the rains will fully yield crops.
There will be an upsurge of water animals.
People will have many diseases, and kings will mete out severe punishments.
This is said of rains under Śravaṇā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Dhaniṣṭhā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of fifty-one āḍhakas. It will rain in portions. The lower lands should be cultivated then, and the higher lands should be left alone. The rains will be awful at night.
They will fully yield crops.
One disease will be predominant, namely, the disease of boils, and kings will keep hold of their arms.
This is said of rains under Dhaniṣṭhā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Śatabhiṣā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixteen āḍhakas.{M.77} The lower lands should be cultivated then, and the higher lands should be left alone.
The rains will fully yield all crops. The country will be overrun by armies, and people and children will go abroad in groups.
This is said of rains under Śatabhiṣā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Pūrvabhādrapadā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-four āḍhakas. At the start of the rains there will be drought for nineteen nights. Flowers and crops will perish, and during that rainy season there will be many thieves.
There will be two epidemics: first a bilious and hot fever, and afterward a powerful eclipse.
At that time men and women will die.
This is said of rains under Pūrvabhādrapadā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Uttarabhādrapadā in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of a full hundred āḍhakas. Great streams will flow. Villages, cities, and towns will be flooded by streams.
Four diseases will be predominant: stomach sickness, eye disease, {M.78} cough, and fever.
Infants and children will die. The higher lands should be cultivated then, and the lower lands should be left alone.
The rains will fully yield flowers and fruits.
This is said of rains under Uttarabhādrapadā.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Revatī in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of sixty-one āḍhakas. The lower lands should be cultivated then, and the higher lands should be left alone.
The rains will fully yield all crops. Kings will lay down their arms, friends and relatives will enjoy the crops that are harvested, and the country will be untroubled. The country will be committed to the gods and the asterisms.
Friends will be committed.
This is said of rains under Revatī.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Aśvinī in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of forty-eight āḍhakas. It will rain in the middle of the rainy season. The lower lands should be cultivated then, and the higher lands should be left alone.
The second rains will fully yield all crops.{M.79} At that time, the country will be given to fears, and thieves will be rampant.
This is said of rains under Aśvinī.
“ ‘When it begins to rain under Bharaṇī in the last month of the hot season, there will be rainfall of a full hundred āḍhakas. The higher lands should be cultivated then, and the lower lands should be left alone.
There will be famine, and people will die of old age.
Kings will wage war with one another, and there will be strife between sons and grandsons.
This is said of rains under Bharaṇī.
“ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on the rains in the season.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, let me explain the effects of seizures by Rāhu during these asterisms.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, when there is a lunar eclipse under Kṛttikā, the people of Kaliṅga and of Magadha are stricken.
When there is a lunar eclipse under Rohiṇī, all people are stricken.
When there is a lunar eclipse under Mṛgaśirā, the people of Videha and royal servants are stricken, likewise under Ārdrā, Punarvasu, and Puṣya.
When there is a lunar eclipse under Aśleṣā, nāgas and the people of the Himālayas are stricken.
When there is a lunar eclipse under Maghā, the people of Gauḍa are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Pūrvaphalgunī, thieves are stricken.
{M.80} When the moon is eclipsed under Uttaraphalgunī, the people of Avantī are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Hastā, the people of Surāṣṭra are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Citrā, birds and bipeds are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Svātī, all who have gone forth are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Viśākhā, the people living by the water are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Anurādhā, merchants and carters are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Jyeṣṭhā, doorkeepers are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Mūlā, travelers are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Pūrvāṣāḍhā, the people of Avantī are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Uttarāṣāḍhā, the people of Kamboja are stricken, as are the Bāhlīkas.
When the moon is eclipsed under Abhijit, the people of the southern region and the people of Tāmraparṇa are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Śravaṇā, thieves and gamblers are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Dhaniṣṭhā, the people of Kuru and those of Pañcāla are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Śatabhiṣā, maulikas and Atharvavedins are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Pūrvabhādrapadā, the people of Gandhāra, the Yavanas, and the people of Kamboja are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Uttarabhādrapadā, {M.81} musicians are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Revatī, boatmen are stricken.
When the moon is eclipsed under Aśvinī, horse traders are stricken. When the moon is eclipsed under Bharaṇī, the people of Bharukaccha are stricken.
Thus, dear Puṣkarasārin, each locality is stricken under the asterism in which a lunar eclipse takes place.
“ ‘This is the lecture on the effects of seizures by Rāhu.
“ ‘Now, please listen to how the activities for each asterism are prescribed in the treatises.
“ ‘According to the statements Of seers and sages, When one knows it is six-starred Kṛttikā, One should prepare firewood under it, Put it on fire, and make cooked offerings That bring forth complete abundance.
“ ‘One should churn milk into ghee, And one should make a shed for cows.
One should buy goats and sheep And release a bull among the cows.
“ ‘One should make all utensils That are made of iron And have any goldsmith’s work done, Along with the preparation of bow and arrow.
“ ‘One should have a builder Construct a curved fireplace, And one should sow seeds Of yellow and red flowers.
{M.82} “ ‘One should build a house And make it suitable to live in.
One should put on new clothes, And one should not incur expenses.
“ ‘One should avoid cruel actions Such as warfare and imprisonment.
A knowing person should, at that time, Not engage in any oppression of others.
“ ‘At that time, one should have All razor blades made.
One should make metal utensils, And one should purchase them.
“ ‘One should wash one’s head for vitality And engage in lovemaking with women.
When there is rain at that time, Enmity will not be quelled.
“ ‘Someone born under Kṛttikā is irascible, Joyful, brave, radiant, audacious, Long lived, reputable, And devoted to offerings.
“ ‘This is to be done under Kṛttikā.
“ ‘Under Rohiṇī one should undertake All work that is agricultural.
One should make new fields, Places, monasteries, and houses.
“ ‘One should employ soldiers, courtesans, Servants, and cattle for one’s household.
One should have all seeds sown And have one’s clothes repaired.
{M.83} “ ‘One should not give loans, Since enmity increases at that time, And one should avoid two things: Feasts and occasions for drinking.
“ ‘Both rain and birth are, at that time, Considered commendable. Someone born under Rohiṇī is empathetic, Forgiving, desirous of women, and eager for food.
They have a long life, possess cattle, And are rich and very wealthy.
“ ‘This is to be done under Rohiṇī.
“ ‘When one knows the moon is in Mṛgaśirā, Which has three stars in a straight line, One should do all the activities that are mild; One should do all the activities done under Rohiṇī.
“ ‘One should plant milky trees And seeds that are milky.
One should erect turrets And parasols at the royal palace.
“ ‘One should engage in all activities and conversation, One should not move and make one’s abode elsewhere, And one should tame camels And bulls for ploughing.
“ ‘One should put on new clothes, And one should wear adornments.
One should do all the ritual actions That are done by the twice-born.
“ ‘One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
Someone born under Mṛgaśirā is disposed to having dreams, Easily alarmed, and perceptive.
“ ‘This is to be done under Mṛgaśirā.
{M.84} “ ‘Under Ārdrā one should pursue things And engage in good activities.
Cruel activities should be avoided; A knowing person should avoid them.
“ ‘One should dig wells, channels, And water reservoirs at that time.
One should wait for the first rains, And one should not buy cattle.
“ ‘One should do the work of pressing sesame, Make alcoholic drinks, Press sugar cane stalks, And plant sugar cane seeds.
“ ‘One may know that the rain At that time will be a downpour.
Someone born under Ārdrā is irascible, Disposed to hunting, and desirous of meat.
“ ‘This is to be done under Ārdrā.
“ ‘Under Punarvasu one should hold vows, Engage in giving away cows, And perform the upanayana ceremony; All this becomes accomplished then.
“ ‘One should marry a woman Who is fit for childbearing.
One should perform the activities Again and again (punar) if one wishes.
{M.85} “ ‘One should not take medicine If one does not wish for the next life. Both rain and birth at that time Are considered commendable.
“ ‘Someone born under Punarvasu Is said to have little amusement, To be covetous of women and disposed to the variegated, And to not have a mind fixed on one place.
“ ‘This is to be done under Punarvasu.
“ ‘Under Puṣya one should constantly be engaged In what confers wealth, fame, and a long life, And should do all the activities Performed by all twice-born.
“ ‘One should be directed toward the king and the ministers, And one should act in obedience and with discipline.
One should anoint the king at that time And put ornaments on one’s body.
“ ‘One should shave one’s beard and trim one’s nails and body hair.
One should call for a ritual priest And have a victory banner erected.
“ ‘One may foretell that the rain At that time will be drizzly rain. There will then be no diseases or robbers, And it will be continually safe and easeful. “ ‘As long as it is in conjunction with Puṣya, One should accomplish all activities.
People should avoid those with whom They are hostile and in enmity.
Someone born under Puṣya Is long lived, reputable, and wealthy.
“ ‘This is to be done under Puṣya.
{M.86} “ ‘Under Aśleṣā one should ensure That harsh actions are avoided.
One should make adornments, And one should build enclosures.
“ ‘One should build dams, Embankments, and bridges.
Gnats and mosquitos are abundant, And the rains at that time are drizzly rain. A person born under Aśleṣā is irascible, Disposed to having dreams, and deceitful.
“ ‘This is to be done under Aśleṣā.
“ ‘Under Maghā one should sow All grains and reap them too.
One should do the threshing, And one should polish them.
“ ‘One should build granaries And store the harvest.
One should always make offerings Of śrāddha to the ancestors.
“ ‘The rains at that time Will give plentiful crops.
A child born at that time Is kindhearted, fond of flavors, And long lived, has many children, And is desirous of women and eager for food.
“ ‘At that time one is victorious in battle When one comes into action early.
A knowing person should avoid All activities that are cruel at that time.
“ ‘This is to be done under Maghā.
{M.87} “ ‘Under Pūrvaphalgunī one should do Things conducive to good fortune; In particular, one should prepare Fruits such as gooseberries.
“ ‘One should do things that are auspicious for a maiden, One should bathe, And one should engage in leisure For the sake of marrying a girl.
“ ‘At that time, one should build houses, And one should employ servants.
One should put to work those Who live off an allotted share.
“ ‘A child who is born at that time Has faint or no hair and is fortunate.
One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Pūrvaphalgunī.
“ ‘Under Uttaraphalgunī one should do All work and activities.
Someone who is born at that time Is sagacious, beautiful, and reputable.
“ ‘One may predict that everyone Will have loss or distress at that time.
One may know that the rain then Will bring unsurpassed abundance.
“ ‘This is to be done under Uttaraphalgunī.
{M.88} “ ‘Under Hastā one should engage In all activities that are light, And one should do all the activities Performed by all twice-born.
“ ‘The minister should be mounted on an elephant (hastin), And one should make a pond.
Theft should then be avoided— A knowing person should avoid it.
“The rain at that time will be Rains that keep flowing.
One should know that someone born At that time is brave, thievish, discerning, Proficient in all the sciences, And healthy and has a long life. “ ‘This is to be done under Hastā.
“ ‘Under Citrā one should have New clothes and ornaments made.
One should see the ornamented king And display the array of the army.
“ ‘One should make gold and silver coins, And one should build cities.
One should adorn oneself at that time With fragrances, necklaces, and unguents.
“ ‘One should instruct in the arts of courtesans: Music, dance, and singing.
One should instruct image makers And chariot builders from before, And one should have painters and scribes Make illuminated books.
{M.89} “ ‘One may foretell that the rain Will at that time be a variegated rain.
Someone who is born at that time Is sagacious, beautiful, bright eyed, “ ‘Eager for food, of gentle conduct, Timid, fickle minded, curious, Long lived, of good fortune, And desirous of women.
“ ‘This is to be done under Citrā.
“ ‘Under Svātī one should employ soldiers, Horses, mules, and donkeys; Food should quickly be made available To travelers who have skipped meals.
“ ‘One should tie up bherī drums, mṛdaṅga drums, Paṇava drums, and muraja drums, And one should arrange and perform marriages And establish friendships at that time.
“ ‘One should accommodate friends, And one should not leave one’s home.
The rain at that time will be Incessant windy rains.
Someone born then is sagacious, Often sick, and fickle minded.
“ ‘This is to be done under Svātī.
“ ‘Under Viśākhā one should engage In ploughing and cultivation.
One should avoid working On barley, wheat, and pulses.
“ ‘Under Viśākhā one should plant Rice, sesame, and beans And trees with good branches (suśākhin).
{M.90} One should work on the house, One should do bathings of the head, And one should do oblations and expiation.
“ ‘One may know that the rain then Will be an extensive downpour.
Someone who is born at that time Is intelligent, beautiful, sagacious, And irascible and has few children, Bad fortune, and an appetite for food.
“ ‘This is to be done under Viśākhā.
“ ‘Under Anurādhā one should meet With friends who are good.
One should do all mild activities And engage in amiableness.
“ ‘One should have oneself shaven, One should do the work with utensils, And one should undertake gatherings to connect And continually forge close connections.
One may predict loss or distress, And there will be very little food.
“ ‘Someone born at that time is kindhearted, Makes friends, and is disposed to what is dharmic.
One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Anurādhā.
“ ‘Under Jyeṣṭhā one should do things early, And one should anoint the king.
One should build cities, Marketplaces, and villages, And one should do all the activities Of kṣatriyas and kings.
{M.91} “ ‘Someone who is born under Jyeṣṭhā Is the eldest (jyeṣṭha) of his siblings, Long lived, reputable, And interested in those who are learned.
“ ‘One should ascend to the palace at that time And mount elephants, horses, and carriages.
One should establish the authority of the eldest In villages, marketplaces, and kingdoms.
“ ‘One may predict that there will be Loss and distress due to affliction.
Harsh actions are to be avoided— A knowing person should avoid them.
One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Jyeṣṭhā.
“ ‘Under Mūlā one should use What grows from roots (mūla), All tubers and yams, All radishes and so on, and seeds.
“ ‘Under Mūlā, whatever old loans one has, Or whatever wealth one had at first, Should be collected and kept in one’s savings, And all in excellent form.
“ ‘All those medicinal sciences That prescribe bathing in rivers For women, boys, and girls, Should be engaged under Mūlā.
{M.92} “ ‘Harsh things are to be avoided, And one should do auspicious things.
One should not organize, together with enemies, Occasions of fermented drinks and alcoholic drinks.
“ ‘Someone who is born at that time is rich, Has many sons, and possesses capital (mūla).
One may predict that there will be No loss or distress at that time.
One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Mūlā.
“ ‘Under Pūrvāṣāḍhā one should Create canals, lakes, ponds, Water wells, cisterns, And water reservoirs.
“ ‘One should grow flowers, Edible roots, and fruits.
One should prepare parks, And one should invite mendicants.
Activities that are violent Are to be avoided at that time.
“ ‘One may foretell that there will be No loss or distress at that time.
Someone who is born then is long lived, Disposed to meritorious actions, and beautiful.
“ ‘This is to be done under Pūrvāṣāḍhā.
“ ‘Under Uttarāṣāḍhā one should Not engage in actions of enmity. One should have all clothes sewn, And one should not put on new ones.
{M.93} “ ‘One should not seize or break things.
At that time building houses is to be avoided, As should building stables for cattle.
One should then act in line With the chiefs in the village And in compliance with the king.
“ ‘Someone born then is confident, Disposed to assembly meetings, Accomplished, and loyal to friends, Speaks slowly, and is discerning.
“ ‘One may predict that there will be Either loss or distress.
One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Uttarāṣāḍhā.
“ ‘Under Abhijit one should not Worship the god Brahmā.
“ ‘Under Śravaṇā one should not Engage in any activities of warfare.
One’s training in and rehearsal of music Are accomplished before long.
“ ‘One should have one’s ears pierced, And the king should be anointed.
One should engage in all activities Of the twice-born.
{M.94} “ ‘One should make bali offerings And cause the military troops to appear.
Someone born then is sagacious, healthy, Strong, and disposed to ritual offerings.
“ ‘One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
When the moon is under Śravaṇā, One will meet with loss.
“ ‘This is to be done under Śravaṇā.
“ ‘Dhaniṣṭhā is a swift asterism Worshiped upon all activities.
Having learnt of it, a brahmin should bathe, And he should anoint the king.
“ ‘One should perform all the activities Done by all the twice-born.
One should appoint foremen in the country And group leaders for all the groups.
“ ‘Someone born then is sagacious, Reputable, very wealthy, and rich, Has many children, and is gentle, Disciplined, and great hearted.
“ ‘One will meet with loss, distress, or harm Due to affliction at that time.
One may know that the rain At that time will be good rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Dhaniṣṭhā.
“ ‘Under Śatabhiṣā one should Continually take medicine.
One should do work of repute, And Atharvavedic activities are to be kept off.
“ ‘One should put merchandise on sale, And one should engage the liquor vendor.
One should dig a water reservoir at that time, And one should plant sesame and beans.
{M.95} “ ‘One should engage boatmen To set out for goods from overseas.
One should reclaim savings And not incur expenses.
“ ‘One should engage border guards, Doorkeepers, and scribes.
One should do medical work And collect medicine.
“ ‘One should either dig a treasure trove Or make deposits into a treasure trove.
One should keep one’s wealth And instruct in medical work. “ ‘One should hunt at that time. One will meet with loss for a long time.
Someone who is born then is healthy, Irascible, and disposed to having dreams.
One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Śatabhiṣā.
“ ‘It is said that under Pūrvabhādrapadā Cruel activities are to be avoided.
One may predict that there will be No loss, harm, or distress.
“ ‘Someone born at that time has long ears, Is very wealthy and always beloved among relatives, Is very rich, commits no cruel actions, And is without anger.
One may foretell that the rain At that time will be tempestuous rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Pūrvabhādrapadā.
{M.96} “ ‘Under Uttarabhādrapadā one should do A long-life and prosperity ceremony, And one should not go southward. One should donate a town at that time.
“ ‘Someone born then is long lived, Is reputable, and possesses wealth.
If one makes savings or expenses then, One may find that it increases threefold.
One may foretell that the rain At that time will be good rain.
“ ‘This is to be done under Uttarabhādrapadā.
“ ‘Under Revatī one should make use Of jewels, silver, riches, and crops.
One should build storehouses, And one should not prepare kiṇva.
“ ‘One should make liquor, Gold, and cow pens.
One should establish a herd of cows And build a cow stable.
One should put on new clothes, And one should wear gold.
“ ‘Someone born then is a mendicant And is disposed to giving, poor, and not spiteful.
He is one who always attends to his relatives And who knows what is dharmic.
One may foretell that under Revatī There is good rain and the occurrence of loss.
“ ‘This is to be done under Revatī.
{M.97} “ ‘Under Aśvinī, men and women should be wedded, And one should build a horse stable.
One should employ horses (aśva) And chariots at that time.
“ ‘Loans and employment should be arranged, And one should plant seeds And make use of carriages, Tamed horses, and elephants.
“ ‘One should take medicine, And one should perform medical treatment.
Someone born then is sagacious, beautiful, Fit to be a king, successful, “ ‘Healthy, strong, and brave And has good fortune.
One may foretell that under Aśvinī There will be good rain and the occurrence of loss.
“ ‘This is to be done under Aśvinī.
“ ‘When one knows it is at the three-starred Bharaṇī, One should accomplish cruel actions.
One should choose and put on display Servants (bhṛtya) and wage workers (bhṛtaka).
“ ‘One should procure wages (bhṛti), And one should not take a wife (bhāryā).
Someone who is born at that time Is haughty, deceitful, dishonest, {M.98} And lazy, knows the methods, And is of wicked conduct and greedy.
“ ‘There is suffering from wounds and sickness, And one should avoid traveling.
One may foretell that the rain then Is the work of great sages.
One should make an offering to appease Yama, the deity of this asterism.
“ ‘Someone born then is of bad conduct, Spiteful toward the gurus, Hurtful toward others, and covetous And interferes in the affairs of others.
“ ‘This is to be done under Bharaṇī.
“ ‘At the time of the twenty-seven asterisms, Beginning with Kṛttikā and ending with Bharaṇī, One should engage in the activity That is in accord with the stars.
“ ‘When in the middle of their course, All crops, plants, and trees are stricken Wherever there is an eclipse, One should engage in everything that was spoken of Regarding the activities during the asterisms.
“ ‘Thus I have given the lecture on the activities during the asterisms.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, there are four stable asterisms. Let me explain them.
Please listen. They are the three Uttaras and Rohiṇī.
One lives safely then.
{M.99} At that time one should plant seeds, build one’s house, and anoint the king.
One should do those other activities that one has spoken about.
“ ‘Then, even if it has thus been foretold That there will be loss, distress, Injury, or dispossession, One will quickly become well.
“ ‘Someone born then will be rich, Knowledgeable, reputable, Fortunate, very wealthy, And a great yogin.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, there are four swift asterisms: Puṣya, Hastā, Abhijit, and Aśvinī.
Under them a discerning person should do swift actions.
One should recite the Vedas, perform mantras, depart and live abroad, and use cows and horses.
At that time one should do all actions related to yoked animals, plants, and medicinal treatment.
One should undertake an offering ritual for four months.
Then, whether there is loss, distress, or injury, one will become well—so it should be said.
“ ‘One should know That someone born then is fortunate, Reputable, very wealthy, A king, a great yogin, a lord, “ ‘Very rich, very wealthy, And thus greatly eminent, A kṣatriya disposed to generosity, Or a brahmin who is a ritual priest.
“ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, there are five harsh asterisms: “ ‘Maghā, the three eastern ones, And Bharaṇī as the fifth.
There will then be no distress, Loss, or physical harm.
“ ‘So it should be said.
There are six that start their conjunction with the moon at midnight: Ārdrā, Aśleṣā, Svātī, Jyeṣṭhā, {M.100} Śatabhiṣā, and Bharaṇī.
They have nine parts, six segments, and two areas.
Rohiṇī, Punarvasu, Viśākhā, and the three Uttaras are the ones that have two parts and fifteen areas.
Kṛttikā, Maghā, Mūlā, and the three Pūrvas are the six that start their conjunction with the moon in the morning.
Mṛgaśirā, Puṣya, Hastā, Citrā, Anurādhā, Śravaṇā, Dhaniṣṭhā, Revatī, and Aśvinī are the nine asterisms that start their conjunction with the moon in the afternoon, forming areas with a duration of thirty muhūrtas.
Abhijit forms an area of five parts with a duration of an equal number of muhūrtas.
“ ‘Moreover, brahmin, there are auspicious muhūrtas, there are inauspicious muhūrtas, and there are muhūrtas that are both auspicious and inauspicious.
During the occurrence of an auspicious muhūrta under an asterism, the asterism is resplendent.
During the occurrence of an inauspicious muhūrta, the asterism is not resplendent.
During the occurrence of a muhūrta that is both auspicious and inauspicious, it is average.
“ ‘Regarding the shortening and lengthening of day and night, the following is said: When during the first month of the rainy season there is the Puṣya asterism on the new moon and Śravaṇā on the full moon, the day has eighteen muhūrtas and the night has twelve muhūrtas.
The sun descends at noon with a stick of sixteen fingers casting a shadow of half a finger.
Āṣāḍhā leads the night, and the sun disappears under Mṛgaśirā.
“ ‘When during the second month of the rainy season there is Maghā on the new moon and Bhādrapadā on the full moon, the day has seventeen muhūrtas and the night has thirteen muhūrtas.{M.101} The sun descends at a shadow of two fingers.
Śravaṇā leads the night, and the sun disappears under Puṣya.
“ ‘When during the third month of the rainy season there is Phalgunī on the new moon and Aśvinī on the full moon, the day has sixteen muhūrtas and the night has fourteen muhūrtas.
The sun descends at a shadow of four fingers. Pūrvabhādrapadā leads the night, and the sun disappears under Maghā.
“ ‘When during the fourth month of the rainy season there is Citrā on the new moon and Kṛttikā on the full moon, the day has fifteen muhūrtas and the night has fifteen muhūrtas.
The sun descends at a shadow of six fingers.
Aśvinī leads the night, and the sun disappears under Phalgunī.
“ ‘When during the first month of winter there is Anurādhā on the new moon and Mṛgaśirā on the full moon, the day has fourteen muhūrtas and the night has sixteen muhūrtas.
The sun descends at a shadow of eight fingers.
Kṛttikā leads the night, and the sun disappears under Citrā.
“ ‘When during the second month of winter there is Jyeṣṭhā on the new moon and Puṣya on the full moon, the day has thirteen muhūrtas and the night has seventeen muhūrtas.
The sun descends at a shadow of ten fingers.
Mṛgaśirā leads the night, and the sun disappears under Viśākhā.
{M.102} “ ‘When during the third month of winter there is Pūrvāṣāḍhā on the new moon and Maghā on the full moon, the day has twelve muhūrtas and the night has eighteen muhūrtas.
The sun descends at a shadow of twelve fingers.
Puṣya leads the night, and the sun comes up under Jyeṣṭhā.
“ ‘When during the fourth month of winter there is Śravaṇā on the new moon and Phalgunī on the full moon, the day has thirteen muhūrtas and the night has seventeen muhūrtas.
The sun descends at a shadow of ten fingers.
Maghā leads the night, and the sun comes up under Āṣāḍhā. “ ‘When during the first month of the hot season there is Uttarabhādrapadā on the new moon and Citrā on the full moon, the day has fourteen muhūrtas and the night has sixteen muhūrtas.{M.103} The sun descends at a shadow of eight fingers. Phalgunī leads the night, and the sun comes up under Śravaṇā. “ ‘When during the second month of the hot season there is Aśvinī on the new moon and Viśākhā on the full moon, the day has fifteen muhūrtas and the night has fifteen muhūrtas. The sun descends at a shadow of six fingers.
Citrā leads the night, and the sun comes up in Uttarabhādrapadā.
“ ‘When during the third month of the hot season there is Kṛttikā on the new moon and Jyeṣṭhā on the full moon, the day has sixteen muhūrtas and the night has fourteen muhūrtas.
The sun descends at a shadow of four fingers.
Viśākhā leads the night, and the sun comes up in Kṛttikā.
“ ‘When during the fourth month of the hot season there is Mṛgaśirā on the new moon and Uttarāṣāḍhā on the full moon, the day has seventeen muhūrtas and the night has thirteen muhūrtas.
At noon the sun begins its descent at a shadow of two fingers.
Jyeṣṭhā leads the night, and the sun comes up in Puṣya.
“ ‘Examining the whole year, all these asterisms are, according to their differences in muhūrtas, divided into divisions and subdivisions according to their conjunction with the new moon and the full moon, and it should be gathered whether it lacks a period (ūnarātra) or is complete with nights (pūrṇarātra).
Then in the third year an intercalary month is added. In the sixth month the days and nights are the same. For six months the day increases, and for six months the night {M.104} increases. For six months the day becomes less, month by month. For six months the night becomes less, month by month.
In the sixth month the muhūrtas are the same.
“ ‘For six months the sun descends and moves to the north, and for six months it moves to the south.
For six months the measure of water in the ocean increases and decreases. According to the course of the sun and the course of the moon, the water in the ocean and time increases.
At this, one calculates, observes, and recalls—thus is this year set forth.
“ ‘The moon, the sun, Rāhu, Śukra, Bṛhaspati, Śanaiścara, Aṅgāraka, and Budha—these are the planets.
Among them, Bṛhaspati remains constant for the entire year.
Thus, Śanaiścara, Budha, Aṅgāraka, and Śukra move in circles.
“ ‘Bharaṇī, Kṛttikā, Rohiṇī, and Mṛgaśirā—this is the first general circle.
Ārdrā, Punarvasu, Puṣya, and Aśleṣā—this is the second general circle.
Maghā, the two Phalgunīs, Hastā, and Citrā—this is the third general circle.
Svātī, Viśākhā, and Anurādhā—this is the fourth general circle.
Jyeṣṭhā, Mūlā, {M.105} and the two Āṣāḍhās, which are all harbingers of great perils—this is the fifth circle.
Dhaniṣṭhā, Śatabhiṣā, the two Bhādrapadās, Revatī, Aśvinī, and Bharaṇī—this is the sixth general circle.
Whatever circle of asterisms presses on these planets during the year, it is the populace or beings connected with that asterism who are stricken—so it should be stated.
“ ‘There are twelves muhūrtas during the day that are stable, and twelve during the night.
Six muhūrtas fluctuate.
Which six? Nairṛta, Varuṇa, Vāyava, Bhargodeva, Raudra, and Vicārin—these are the six that fluctuate.
“ ‘In the whole month of Śrāvaṇa, when daytime consists of eighteen muhūrtas, at sunrise it is the muhūrta called Caturojas. Noon is between the muhūrtas Rohita and the muhūrta Bala.
At sunset it is the muhūrta called Vicārin.
In the night, which consists of twelve muhūrtas, at the sixth muhūrta, after the sun has set, it is the muhūrta called Nayamanas.
At the end of the night it is the muhūrta called Ātapāgni.
“ ‘In the whole month of Bhādrapada, when daytime consists of seventeen muhūrtas, at sunrise it is the muhūrta called Caturojas.
At noon it is the muhūrta called Abhijita.
{M.106} At sunset it is the muhūrta called Raudra .
In the night, which consists of thirteen muhūrtas, when the sun has just set, it is the muhūrta called Vicārin.
At midnight it is the muhūrta called Mahābhaya.
At the end of the night it is the muhūrta called Ātapāgni.
“ ‘In the whole month of Aśvayuja, when daytime consists of sixteen muhūrtas, at sunrise it is the muhūrta called Caturojas.
Noon is between the muhūrta called Samudgata and the muhūrta called Abhijita.
At sunset it is the muhūrta called Bhargodeva.
In the night, which consists of fourteen muhūrtas, when the sun has just set, it is the muhūrta called Raudra.
Midnight is between the muhūrta Abhijita and the muhūrta Bhīṣamāṇa.
At the end of the night it is the muhūrta called Ātapāgni.
“ ‘In the whole month of Kārttika, when day and night have equal length, with daytime consisting of fifteen muhūrtas and the night consisting of fifteen muhūrtas, at sunrise it is the muhūrta called Caturojas.
At noon it is the muhūrta called Saṃmukha.
At sunset it is the muhūrta called Santata. {M.107} In the night, when the sun has just set, it is the muhūrta called Bhargodeva.
At midnight it is the muhūrta called Abhijita.
At the end of the night it is the muhūrta called Ātapāgni.
“ ‘In the whole month of Mārgaśīrṣa, when daytime consists of fourteen muhūrtas, at sunrise it is the muhūrta called Caturojas. Noon is in between the muhūrtas Virata and Saṃmukha.
At sunset it is the muhūrta called Varuṇa.
In the night, which consists of sixteen muhūrtas, when the sun has just set, it is the muhūrta called Saṃtāna.
Midnight is in between the muhūrtas Rākṣasa and Abhijita. At the end of the night it is the muhūrta called Ātapāgni.
“ ‘In the whole month of Pauṣa, when daytime consists of thirteen muhūrtas, at sunrise it is the muhūrta called Caturojas.
At noon it is the muhūrta called Virata.
At sunset it is the muhūrta called Nairṛta.
In the night, which consists of seventeen muhūrtas, when the sun has just set, it is the muhūrta called Varuṇa.
At midnight it is the muhūrta called Rākṣasa.
At the end of the night it is the muhūrta called Ātapāgni.
“ ‘In the whole month of Māgha, when daytime consists of eighteen muhūrtas, at sunrise it is the muhūrta called Caturojas.
Noon is in between the muhūrtas Sāvitra and Virata.
At sunset it is the muhūrta called Vijaya.
In the nighttime, which consists of eighteen muhūrtas, when the sun has just set, it is the muhūrta called Nairṛta.
Midnight is in between the muhūrtas Gardabha and Rākṣasa.
At the end of the night, it is the muhūrta called Ātapāgni.
{M.108} “ ‘As it is in Śrāvaṇa, so it is in Māgha.
As it is in Bhādrapada, so it is in Phālguna.
As it is in Aśvayuja, so it is in Caitra.
As it is in Kārttika, so it is in Vaiśākha.
As it is in Mārgaśīrṣa, so it is in Jyaiṣṭha.
As it is in Pauṣa, so it is in Āṣāḍha.
In this way one should know the course and movement of the asterisms.
This is the first lecture on the movement of the asterisms.
“ ‘In between the asterisms one should add or subtract according to night and day.
As the day either decreases or increases, or whether it is for the entire month or half a month, on the second, sixth, ninth, twelfth, and fourteenth the day increases by a kalā, and the night decreases by a kalā.
“ ‘There are four great kings Through whom the earth remains stable: Ativṛddhi, Viśuddhi, Vardhamāna, and Pṛthakśravas.
“ ‘There are four great elements That shake the earth: Water, Indra, wind, And the lord fire.
“ ‘When there are three tremors In a fortnight, or six in one month, One may predict an enemy army coming, When the earth shakes repeatedly.
{M.109} “ ‘If there is an earthquake under Viśākhā, there is peril for ten days; If under Jyeṣṭhā, there is peril for twelve days; If under Āṣāḍhā, there is peril for twenty-five days; If under Śravaṇā, there is peril for seventy-five days.
“ ‘If under Bhādrapadā, there is peril for a hundred days; If under Aśvayuj, it is held to be in the order of things.
If in the month of Kārttika, there is peril for one and a half months.
If in the month of Mārgaśīrṣa, it is held to be in the order of things.
“ ‘If in the month of Pauṣa, there is peril for fifty-five days.
If in the month of Māgha, it is held that there is peril for a hundred days.
If in the month of Phālguna, there is peril for one and a half months.
If in the month of Caitra, there is peril for thirty days.
As the result of the tremors of the earth, An earthquake will occur.
“ ‘When during all months The earth shakes repeatedly And the trees thus quiver, Or if the water shakes And the leafy mountains shake, Then one may predict peril.
{M.110} “ ‘Cities, villages, pasture camps, And whatever is inhabited at that time Quickly become deserted and bereft of people And become the domain of wild animals. “ ‘In five or ten years they turn into forests.
One should know that the quarters All become uninhabited Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Kṛttikā, The villages or cities Are to be left immediately, For fire will burn their haystacks, “ ‘Black fire will rage through, And workmen, storage places, And houses will be reduced to ashes Due to the destruction.
“ ‘Those who were born, thrived, And lived in that village Will undergo calamity Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Rohiṇī, All seeds will come to naught. Crops will not grow fully, And the harvest will be miserable.
{M.111} “ ‘Women who are pregnant Will suffer terrible miscarriages.
Befallen with the calamity of famine, People will subsist on only a third portion.
“ ‘Magnanimous kings, The glorious, most excellent of men, Will undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Mṛgaśirā, Plants and herbs will come to naught.
Physicians, those who are learned in the Vedas, Water carriers, those who offer Soma, “ ‘And brahmins who have drunk Soma And set off to the forest practicing austerities Will undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Ārdrā, Milky trees will come to naught, And food and drink will come to naught.
Travelers, elephant keepers, “ ‘Well diggers, trench diggers, And those who are wicked thieves Will undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Punarvasu, Water carriers, hunters, Duck trappers, carters, Parakeets and mynas, “ ‘The young, churners, Butchers, and conch traders Will undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
{M.112} “ ‘When the earth shakes under Puṣya, Brahmins and leaders, Merchants who travel far, People in caravans, “ ‘Travelers, mountain dwellers, And those who depend on them Will undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
There will be hailstones raining down And great damage to the crops.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Aśleṣā, All nāgas, serpents, and snakes, Insects, ants, and dogs, One-hoofed animals, “ ‘And doctors, poison makers, And people living in caves Will undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Maghā, The king will be in distress.
Śrāddha offerings, gatherings, And festivals will come to naught.
Offerings and rituals for the gods Will all come to naught at that time.
“ ‘Those who are born and those grown up, Others who are great paṇḍitas, And musicians, too will all come to naught, And those people who belong to high families Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Pūrvaphalgunī, The season will be upset.{M.113} Those who delight in the Dharma, those in camps, And those who subsist as toll collectors Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Uttaraphalgunī, Merchants traveling across continents, Caravan leaders, those in camps, Those who subsist on the arts and crafts, “ ‘The peoples of Aṅga, Videha, Magadha, And Nairṛta, and the totality of women Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Hastā, People who are potters, Doctors, group leaders, Ministers, army officers, “ ‘Tāramakas, nārapaṭas, Vipsaras, and poachers Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Citrā, It is like the preceding one.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Svātī, Robbers, those of bad conduct, those who do harm, Those who delight in those actions, Those who plunder on request, “ ‘And the people of the Himālayas, in the north, Who live on air and practice austerities Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
{M.114} “ ‘When the earth shakes under Viśākhā, Great mountains will break apart, Harsh winds will blow with unwholesome hail, And horsemen and travelers Will all lose their strength— They will undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Anurādhā, There will be great misfortune for dacoits.
Rogues, gamblers, Pickpockets, “ ‘The people of Andhra, those of Puṇḍra, And the Pulindas will be in peril and unsettled, And strong divisions between friends Will occur among the population.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Jyeṣṭhā, The king will be in distress.
Birds of prey, bulls, Beasts of prey, ferocious animals, “ ‘Those who act cruelly, the people of Śūrasena, The Mallas, and the Bāhlīkas, As well as those who are devoted to them, Due to the quick adversity, Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Mūlā, Quadrupeds, bipeds, Demons who take possession, And beings who live in caves Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.{M.115} “ ‘There will be little water for the crops, And it will quickly make for famine.
Caves, mountains, and foundations (mūla) Will then collapse into the earth.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Pūrvāṣāḍhā, For aquatic animals, fish, oysters, Dolphins, crabs, crocodiles, Makaras, turtles, “ ‘For the heads of castes and family lineages, The wealthy and discerning, And the twice-born, There will be great peril.
They will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Uttarāṣāḍhā, There is great misfortune for craftsmen.
Blacksmiths, master builders, Tin workers, carpenters, “ ‘The poor and the destitute, And the various kinds of artisans Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
The houses of villages will be destroyed Along with their movables and immovables.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Vaiṣṇava, {M.116} Teachers, erudite scholars, Poets, experts in mantras, The Yugandharas, the people of Śūrasena, The Abhirājas, the Paṭaccaras, The Kiśaṭṭas, and the people of Śaradaṇḍa Will all face what is undesired.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Dhaniṣṭhā, There will be great misfortune for the wealthy (dhanin).
Landlords, prominent townsmen, The heads of guilds, “ ‘The formidable, the well off, The Bhadrakāras, the Yugandharas, The Pārikūlas, the Bhojyas, And other good townsfolk Will all undergo tribulations Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Vāruṇya, There will be great misfortune for those by the water.
Elephants, horses, donkeys, and camels Will be severely affected.
“ ‘Likewise, the Sauvīrakas, the Madras, The Bāhlīkas, the Kekayas, Those living in wagons without fixed residence, And those in Janasthāna will be stricken.
{M.117} “ ‘When the earth shakes under Sāja, Demons, murderers, Shepherds, pig sellers, And Sauvīras will be stricken.
“ ‘Those who live on trade, Vaiśyas, Śūdras, Karītis, Yavanas, the Mālavas, and so on, As well as pickpockets, will all go to ruin.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Ahirbudhnya, There will be great misfortune for merchants.
Those who delight in the Dharma, siddhas, Those who live on toll fees, “ ‘The Śibis, the Vatsas, the Vātsyas, Kṣatriyas, those who descend from Arjuna, And kings and archers from Sindhu Will all be afflicted before long.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Revatī, There will be a very violent war.
Villages will be massacred, And village will destroy village.
“ ‘Sailors living by the water, The Ramaṭhas, the people of Bharukaccha, The headmen of the Abhisāras, And all armies will be struck by fire.
{M.118} “ ‘When the earth shakes under Aśvinī, There will be great misfortune for horses (aśva).
Villages will be massacred, As brothers seek to kill brothers.
“ ‘Those who are conceived then And those who are born then Will suffer uninterruptedly For the next three years.
“ ‘They will not be beautiful babies, And they will not be embellishable people.
Kings descending from Arjuna Will assault each other for three years.
“ ‘When the earth shakes under Bharaṇī, There will be great misfortune for thieves.
Rogues, gamblers, Pickpockets, “ ‘Those who deceive with a mirror, Cheats, prison keepers, Barbers, and bad people Who engage in evil conduct Will all be stricken at that time, Once shaken by that earthquake.
“ ‘If immediately after The earth has trembled, After an interval of a week, There is a majestic cloud, {M.119} “ ‘Thick, dark as black eyeshadow, And resembling a great mountain, Indra begins to rain down then, As it is said by the great sages.
“ ‘Being like harbingers of good fortune, With Indra’s lightning bolt as victory banner, Thunderclouds appear at dusk, Obscuring the sun and the moon. “ ‘Clouds resembling pomegranates Appear in the sky at that time. Then, having beheld such signs, one may know That the quakes come with Indra; This would be then the prediction As it is given by great sages.
“ ‘Then, in utter confidence, One should sow all seeds, And merchants should engage in commerce Without any fear at that time.
Of all the earthquakes, the quakes That come with Indra are commendable.
“ ‘If immediately after The earth has trembled, After an interval of a week, A cloud begins to cover the sky, {M.120} “ ‘And then a series of clouds arise With the appearance of silk, Moving progressively In the western direction, “ ‘And clouds resembling dolphins, Aquatic animals, fish, and makaras Come to appear at dusk, Obscuring the sun and the moon, “ ‘Then, having beheld such signs, one may know That the quakes come with water; This would then be the prediction As it is given by great sages.
“ ‘One should then plant seeds In the higher lands, at mountain peaks, In fields, and in groves, Because in lower lands they will come to naught.
“ ‘In mud, water, or dusty soil, At that time they will come to naught.
Of all the earthquakes, the quakes That come with water are commendable.
“ ‘If immediately after The earth has trembled, After an interval of a week, Terrible winds begin to blow, “ ‘Dusk appears tawny, And the sun and moon are red, Then, having beheld such signs, one may know That the quakes come with wind.
{M.121} “ ‘Therefore there is the proclamation, As given by the great sages, That a wise person should not leave home And should guard himself at that time.
“ ‘One should make a hiding place, And one should build walls and dig trenches. Being in conflict with neighbors, Fear will arise among the people.
“ ‘Of all the earthquakes, Those that have the described qualities Have been determined by people To have come with wind.
“ ‘If immediately after The earth has trembled, After an interval of a week, There are terrible showers of meteors, “ ‘Dusk has a red glow, And the sun and the moon turn red, Then, having beheld such signs, it may be known That the quakes come with fire. “ ‘Fire will burn kingdoms And any riches that have been saved. Columns of smoke will appear, And arms will be taken up violently.
“ ‘The Vīṇā configuration will appear in the sky, And it will not rain for nine months.
Of all the earthquakes, the quakes that come With fire are the worst ones.
“ ‘In the morning, kṣatriyas And kings will be afflicted; At midday, horsemen, elephant riders, Charioteers, and ministers.
{M.122} In the afternoon, cows, cattle, Vaiśyas, and śūdras will be afflicted, And at dusk, robbers and outcastes Will be tormented.
“ ‘In the first watch of the night, The communities of barbarians will be harmed.
At midnight, it will be Women and eunuchs; In the third watch of the night, Those who live on agriculture, trade, and cow herding.
In the waxing half of the month, Those who do savage work will be afflicted.
“ ‘In the waning half of the month, brahmins and kṣatriyas Who perform offering rituals will be tormented, And those foremost in the Dharma, Whose manner is pure, will be distressed.
One who has a gentle disposition Toward the wise and learned— That person is a brahmin with Vedic knowledge Who is worthy of reverence by kings.{M.123} “ ‘The four courses of Bṛhaspati Are the same as the auspicious actions, The four courses of the sun Are the same as the bright actions, And the four courses of the moon Are the same as brahmic action.
“ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on predictions regarding earthquakes.
“ ‘Now, dear Puṣkarasārin, let me set forth the lecture on the occurrence of illness under the twenty-eight asterisms.
Please listen.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Kṛttikā, The illness will last for four days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Fire being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of curd.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Rohiṇī, The illness will last for five days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Prajāpati being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fresh garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Mṛgaśirā, The illness will last for eight days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘The moon being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of lentil broth.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
{M.124} “ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Ārdrā, The illness will last for ten days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Rudra being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of rice porridge.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Punarvasu, The illness will last for eight days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘The sun being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Puṣya, The illness will last only a little while, And after five days they will be better.
“ ‘Bṛhaspati being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Aśleṣā, There is no curative treatment, But the Serpent is then the presiding deity.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Maghā, The illness will last for eight days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘The ancestors being the presiding deities at that time, One should make a bali offering of khichri.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Pūrvaphalgunī, The illness will last for five days, And after that they will be better.
{M.125} “ ‘Aryaman being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Uttaraphalgunī, There is no curative treatment, But Bhaga is then the presiding deity.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Hastā, The illness will last for five days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘The sun being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Citrā, The illness will last for eight days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Tvaṣṭṛ being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of ghee and mung beans.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Svātī, The illness will be afflictive For twenty-five days.
“ ‘The wind being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of variegated garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Viśākhā, The illness will be a heavy one, Lasting for nineteen days.{M.126} “ ‘Indra being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Anurādhā, The illness will last for half a month, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Mitra being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering with a bowl of ghee.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Jyeṣṭhā, The illness will be an afflictive one, Lasting for thirteen days.
“ ‘Indra being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Mūlā, The illness will last for a month, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Nairṛti being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of liquor and meat.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Pūrvāṣāḍhā, The illness will be a very afflictive one, Lasting for eight months.
“ ‘Water being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of sesame khichri.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Uttarāṣāḍhā, The illness will last for seven days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Viśva being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of rice porridge.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
{M.127} “ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Abhijit, The illness will last for six months, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Viṣṇu being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of whey.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Śravaṇā, The illness will be a heavy one, Lasting for a full twelve months.
“ ‘Viṣṇu being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Dhaniṣṭhā, The illness will be a heavy one, Lasting for thirteen full months. “ ‘Vāsava being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of ghee and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness. “ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Śatabhiṣā, It will last for eighteen days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Varuṇa being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of rice porridge.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Pūrvabhādra, There is no curative treatment, But Ahirbudhnya is then the presiding deity.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Uttarabhādra, The illness will last for seven days, And after that they will be better.
{M.128} “ ‘Aryaman being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Revatī, The illness will last for twenty-eight days, And after that they will be better.
“ ‘Pūṣa being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of fragrances and garlands.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Aśvinī, The illness will be a very afflictive one, Lasting for twenty-five days.
“ ‘Gandharva being the presiding deity at that time, One should make a bali offering of barley meal.
Through this act of offering bali, They will be cured of that illness.
“ ‘If a woman or a man Falls sick under Bharaṇī, There is no curative treatment, But Yama is then the presiding deity.
A sagacious person should keep moral discipline, Because consequently they will go to heaven.
“ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on the occurrence of illness.
“ ‘Now, dear Puṣkarasārin, let me set forth the lecture on imprisonment and release.
Please listen.
{M.129} “ ‘Dear Puṣkarasārin, it should be said that if one is chained or imprisoned under Kṛttikā, one will be released after three days.
If one is chained or imprisoned under Rohiṇī, one will be released after three days.
If one is chained or imprisoned under Mṛgaśirā, one will be released after twenty-one days.
If one is chained or imprisoned under Ārdrā, one will be released after half a month; if chained or imprisoned under Punarvasu, after seven days; under Puṣya, after three days; under Aśleṣā, after thirty days; under Maghā, after sixteen days; under Pūrvaphalgunī, after ten days; under Uttaraphalgunī, after seven days; under Hastā, after five days; under Citrā, after seven days; under Svātī, after ten days; under Viśākhā, after twenty-six days; under Anurādhā, after thirty-one days; under Jyeṣṭhā, after eighteen days; under Mūlā, after thirty-six days; under Pūrvāṣāḍhā, after fourteen days; under Uttarāṣāḍhā, after fourteen days; under Abhijit, after six days; under Śravaṇā, after five days; under Dhaniṣṭhā, after twenty-eight days; under Śatabhiṣā, after eighteen days; under Pūrvabhādrapadā, after some time; under Uttarabhādrapadā, after thirteen days; under Revatī, after fourteen days; and under Aśvinī, after three days.
It should be said that if one is chained or imprisoned under Bharaṇī, one will be released after three days.
“ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on imprisonment and release.
“ ‘Now, dear Puṣkarasārin, let me set forth the lecture on birthmarks. Please listen.
“ ‘If a woman has a birthmark on the crown of her head That is subtle and smooth and has the color of a pink lotus, It is said that she will have a king as her husband If she has a beauty spot above the breasts.{M.130} “ ‘If a woman has a birthmark on her forehead That is subtle and has the color of black eyeshadow, She will have an army general as her husband If she has a beauty spot between the breasts.
“ ‘If she has a mole between the brows, They say that young woman is of bad conduct.
She will come to have five husbands If she has a beauty spot within her navel.{M.131} “ ‘If she has a birthmark on her cheek, They say that the young woman Is liable to experience sorrow If she has a beauty spot amid her body hair.
“ ‘If she has a mole on her ear, They say that the young woman is learned.
She is erudite and possesses knowledge If she has a beauty spot on her lower back.
“ ‘If she has a mole on her upper lip, They say that the young woman is dishonest.
She will have a miserable married life If she has a beauty spot on her thigh.
{M.132} “ ‘If she has a mole on her lower lip, They say that the young woman is of bad conduct.
She gets plenty of sweet food and drink If she has a beauty spot on her private parts.
“ ‘If she has a mole on her chin, They say that the young woman is of bad conduct.
She gets plenty of sweet food and drink If she has a second beauty spot on her private parts.
“ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on birthmarks.
“ ‘Now, dear Puṣkarasārin, let me set forth the lecture on the qualities of being born under an asterism. Please listen.
“ ‘A person born under Kṛttikā Will be ardent, kindly daring, Brave, fierce, and someone Who speaks kindly.
“ ‘A person born under Rohiṇī Will be wealthy, righteous, Vigorous, resolute, brave, and firm, And they will always have happiness.
{M.133} “ ‘A person born under Mṛgaśirā Will be gentle, charming, Beautiful, and particularly Loved by women.
“ ‘A person born under Ārdrā Will be violent natured, fierce, Very talkative, engaged in savage actions, And a great lord over many hundreds.
“ ‘A person born under Punarvasu Will be undesirous, intelligent, Disposed to the Dharma, And short tempered.
“ ‘A person born under Puṣya Will be a radiant brahmin, A kṣatriya, a king, Or a revered vaiśya or śūdra.
“ ‘A person born under Aśleṣā Will be hot tempered, irascible, Cruel, a bad person, and fierce— So may one foretell everything.
“ ‘A person born under Maghā Will be very discerning, will perform śrāddha, And will have a lot of good fortune, Riches, grains, and enjoyments.
“ ‘A person born under Pūrvaphalgunī Will be disposed to having a mind That is unrighteous and will be someone Who violates the wife of his guru.
“ ‘A person born under Uttaraphalgunī Will have enjoyments, Divine knowledge, And good fortune.
“ ‘A person born under Hastā Will be pure natured and courageous, Will eat soft food, will lead an army, And will not engage in stealing.
“ ‘A person born under Citrā will have bright eyes (citrākṣa), Will be a dazzling storyteller (citrakathākara), Will be beautiful, will have many women, And will be disposed to what is diverse (citraśīla).
{M.134} “ ‘A person born under Svātī Will be celebrated among friends, Will be discerning, gentle, and fond of drinking, And will make friends and be thoughtful.
“ ‘A person born under Viśākhā Will be radiant, very wealthy, Brave, courageous, and dexterous, And they will have good fortune.
“ ‘A person born under Anurādhā Will have friends and be magnetic.
They will be pure and grateful And have a righteous nature.
“ ‘A person born under Jyeṣṭhā Will have friends, overcome all, Delight in archery, And be fond of women.
“ ‘A person born under Mūlā Will be ungrateful and unrighteous. They will have firm courage And commit bad deeds.
“ ‘A person born under Pūrvāṣāḍhā Will be selfish and have distracted senses.
They will be fond of fish and meat And will be someone who kills.
“ ‘A person born under Viśvadeva Will be empathetic, generous, Consummate in knowledge, Kind-hearted, and certain.
“ ‘A person born under Śravaṇā Will be a teacher, a composer of treatises, Trustworthy, attentive to his duties, Long lived, and prosperous.
“ ‘A person born under Dhaniṣṭhā Will have an unsteady mind And manifold possessions And will harbor doubts about everything.
{M.135} “ ‘A person born under Vāruṇya Will be disposed to hatred.
They will be someone Who speaks ill everywhere. “ ‘A person born under Pūrvabhādrapadā Will have good conduct and virtue. They will be grateful And talkative.
“ ‘A person born under Uttarabhādrapadā Will be discerning and sagacious. They will have many children and much wealth And be disposed to the Dharma. “ ‘A person born under Revatī Will be righteous and serve their relatives.
They will be poor, have little wealth, And always be giving and unenvious.
“ ‘A person born under Aśvinī Will be very discerning.
They will be liked by many people. They will be brave and have good fortune.
“ ‘A person born under Bharaṇī Will be of evil conduct, undiscerning, Lustful, desirous of giving, And one who lives off others.
“ ‘This, dear Puṣkarasārin, is the lecture on the qualities of being born under an asterism.{M.203} “ ‘Moreover, great brahmin, I can veridically turn this mind to recollecting, knowing, and directly realizing past lives.
I can fully recollect numerous past lives.
“ ‘You may be having doubts or uncertainty, brahmin, thinking it was someone else who at that time, at that moment, was Brahmā, preeminent among gods.
But it should not be seen in this way.
It was I who, at that time, at that moment, was Brahmā, preeminent among gods.
Then, having passed away, I was Indra Kauśika.
Then, having passed away, I was the brahmin Araṇemi Gautama.
Then, having passed away, I was the great sage named Śvetaketu.
Then, having passed away, I was the paṇḍita Śuka.
It was I who then divided the Vedas into four, {M.204} namely, Puṣya of the Ṛgveda branch, Paṅkti of the Sāmaveda branch, the twenty-one schools of the Yajurveda branch, and Kratu of the Atharvaveda branch.
“ ‘You may be having doubts or uncertainty, brahmin, thinking it was someone else who at that time, at that moment, was the great sage named Vasu. But it should not be seen in this way.
It was I who, at that time, at that moment, was the great sage named Vasu.
It was I who obtained Takṣaka’s maiden daughter as my wife.
Having become completely impassioned, I lost my miraculous power and strayed from the meditative absorptions.
I reproached myself and on that occasion uttered the verse: Oṃ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ |Tatsavitur vareṇyaṃ bhargo devasya dhīmahi |Dhiyo yo naḥ pracodayāt || “ ‘Therefore I say to you, brahmin, that it is a mere commonplace notion of people to speak of “brahmin,” “kṣatriya,” “vaiśya,” or “śūdra.”
This is in fact one—all this is one and the same.
So please grant your daughter Prakṛti as wife for my son Śārdūlakarṇa.
I will bestow on you whatever dowry you have in mind.’
“Having heard these words from the outcaste king Triśaṅku, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin said: “ ‘Being the lord, versed in the Vedas, superior, There is no one who is better than you.
You are the same as great Brahmā In all the worlds with their gods.
{M.205} “ ‘Dear sir, to your son I give my daughter Prakṛti, Who is endowed with ethics, appearance, and virtues.
May the two of them, Śārdūlakarṇa and fine Prakṛti, Be happy together—it is much to my delight!’
“At this point, the five hundred brahmin youths loudly erupted in a great uproar: ‘Dear teacher, please do not approve of a matrimonial bond between brahmins learned in the Vedas and an outcaste!
It is not proper, dear teacher, for brahmins learned in the Vedas to forge a matrimonial bond with an outcaste!’
“The brahmin Puṣkarasārin then reprimanded them, putting an end to the uproar, as he spoke on this matter with a verse: “ ‘It is like this: what Triśaṅku has been saying Is true, accurate, real, truthful, certain, and sound.’
{M.206} “When the brahmin Puṣkarasārin had put an end to the brahmin youths’ great uproar, he said to the outcaste king Triśaṅku, ‘This great man, dear Triśaṅku, made of the four great elements, has been arranged by Brahmā, lord of this Sahā world, of whom: “ ‘The starry firmament is his head, The vault of the sky is his belly, The mountains are his thighs, And the earth’s surface his feet, “ ‘The sun and the moon are his eyes, The grasses and trees his body hair, The ocean are his excrements, The rivers are his urine, “ ‘And the rains are his tears.
This is Brahmā, lord of this Sahā world, And you are the supreme knower— It is just as you have been telling me.
“ ‘Now, dear Triśaṅku, what has been said here?
One must clearly examine the particular characteristic.
They come into existence due to the deed that is done by a father and a mother; being enticed by the desire for pleasure… “ ‘Beings go into a well-pregnant womb— No human being comes by itself.
In all castes people are given birth to— There is no one who is born from the wind.
One must recognize the actual nature in the world.
Who then are brahmins, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, śūdras?
“ ‘Everywhere there are people who are one eyed, crooked, Lame, or suffering from leprosy, vitiligo, or epilepsy, {M.207} There are those who are dark, who are fair, and who are dusky— People are thus distinguished from one another.
“ ‘But they all have bones, skin, nails, flesh, Sorrow, happiness, excrements, and urine, And there is no difference in the sense faculties— Therefore the four caste categories do not exist.
“ ‘If a twice-born attained passage To heaven by means of mantras, Then dark or bright actions Would not bear any fruit.
“ ‘Since dark or bright actions Indeed come to bear fruit, One sees their karmic ripening Among the five states of rebirth.’
“Having been defeated there among the hundreds of brahmin youths by the greatly renowned outcaste king Triśaṅku, the brahmin Puṣkarasārin said, ‘A brahmin he is, the outcaste king named Triśaṅku.
For you were Brahmā and Indra Kauśika.
You were Araṇemi Gautama.
You were Śvetaketu and the paṇḍita Śuka.
The Vedas were promulgated as fourfold by you.
You were the lord Vasu, the greatly renowned royal sage.
“ ‘You are in possession of supreme knowledge, You are fully accomplished in all disciplines, And you are superior, distinguished, and supreme in the world, For you are in possession of knowledge and conduct.
“ ‘To you I give my immaculate daughter Prakṛti, Who is endowed with ethics, appearance, and virtues.
May the two of them, Śārdūlakarṇa and fine Prakṛti, Be happy together—it is much to my delight!’
{M.208} “Having taken a golden pitcher filled with water, the brahmin joyfully poured it out and offered his daughter with the water, declaring, ‘May this maiden Prakṛti be the wife of Śārdūlakarṇa.’
“The outcaste king was overjoyed.
After having arranged the marriage of his son, he returned to his city with renown and ruled over his kingdom according to the Dharma.
“You may be having doubts or uncertainty, monks, or you may feel unsure, thinking it was someone else who at that time, at that moment, was the outcaste king named Triśaṅku.
But it should not be seen in this way.
It was I who at that time, at that moment, was the outcaste king named Triśaṅku.
Monks, you may be thinking it was someone else who at that time, at that moment, was the outcaste prince named Śārdūlakarṇa.
But it should not be seen in this way.
It was the monk Ānanda who at that time, at that moment, was the outcaste prince named Śārdūlakarṇa.
You may be thinking that it was someone else who at that time, at that moment, was the brahmin named Puṣkarasārin.
But it should not be seen in this way.
It was the monk Śāriputra who at that time, at that moment, was the brahmin named Puṣkarasārin.
You may be thinking that it was someone else who at that time, at that moment, was the brahmin Puṣkarasārin’s maiden daughter named Prakṛti.
But it should not be seen in this way.
It was the nun Prakṛti who at that time, at that moment, was the brahmin Puṣkarasārin’s maiden daughter named Prakṛti.
It is she who now, {M.209} because of that affection, because of that love, followed the monk Ānanda wherever he went, who stood behind Ānanda wherever he stood, standing silently at the door at whatever house he entered for alms.”
Then, in that connection, on that matter, on that occasion, the Blessed One spoke this verse: “It is due to a past lifetime together And due to kindness in the present.
It is because of this that love arises, Like a lily in the water.
“Therefore, monks, in order to directly realize the four truths of the noble ones that have not yet been directly realized, I call for utmost diligence and intense fervor.
One should apply enthusiasm and undeterredness with mindfulness, full awareness, and heedfulness.
In order to swiftly and directly realize these four truths of the noble ones that have not yet been directly realized—the truth of the noble ones on suffering, the truth of noble ones on the origin of suffering, the truth of the noble ones on cessation, and the truth of the noble ones on the way leading to cessation—one should apply utmost intense fervor, diligence, effort, enthusiasm, and undeterredness with mindfulness, full awareness, and heedfulness.”
{M.210} When this discourse on the Dharma was being spoken, the minds of sixty monks were liberated from the contaminants, no longer clinging.
And for many śrāvakas, brahmins, and householders there arose the dustless and stainless Dharma eye.
This is what the Blessed One said.
Elated, the monks, King Prasenajit of Kauśala, the people of Śrāvastī, and the world with its brahmins, householders, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, and gandharvas rejoiced at what the Blessed One had spoken.
This concludes the noble sūtra about Śārdūlakarṇa.
Translated by the Indian preceptor-monk Ajitaśrībhadra and the chief editor-translator Sengkar monk Śākya Ö.

