
The Noble One Hundred and Eight Names of Mañjuśrī 
Homage to the youthful Mañjuśrī!
With a pure heart, Bowing my head to the Sage, Here I will recite the names The buddhas have praised.Beautiful in form, physically handsome, Yours unexcelled among all bodies, All attributes complete, Mañjuśrī, gloriously excellent, Inconceivable, free from thought, Heroic, beyond thought, wondrous, Inconceivable in body, speech, and deed, And inconceivable in mind, too, Meditation-on-emptiness in essence, Endowed with empty qualities, Ardent in devotion to emptiness, Teaching the emptiness of all three existences, All knowing and all seeing, Powerful lord over all lands, Supreme among all sentient beings, The one to whom all sentient beings have paid homage, Vanquisher of all states of misery And all who propound misleading views, Defeater of opponents, Lion of speech, supreme among humans, Free from defiling passions and afflictions, One without obscuration or taint, Rescuer of all sentient beings, Liberated and world liberator, Practicing the ascetic discipline of wearing dreadlocks and muñja, Brahmā, dwelling in the abode of Brahmā, Holding a rosary and bearing a staff, Pure and endowed with the purities, Gentle voiced, exercising dominion, Lotus born and lotus eyed, Your color lotus-anther-like, Lotus throned, Immaculate, bearing a blue lotus, Your intention pure, your mind at peace, You are a buddha and a pratyekabuddha.
You are the Ādibuddha, Endowed with miraculous power, possessing dominion, The teacher of the four truths, The protector of the world, thousand eyed.
You are Īśvara, you are the lord of all beings, And you are Śiva the tamer of sentient beings.
Sovereign of all who is foremost in virtue, You are the dominant bull, the foremost being, The preeminent, the one who remembers past lives, The leader, the tamer, The victor’s child, the one born from the Victor himself.
You are the thousand-rayed sun, You are the moon and Jupiter, You are Vaiśravaṇa and Varuṇa, You are Maheśvara, you are Viṣṇu, You are Ananta king of nāgas, And, similarly, you are Skanda the commander, Vemacitra the lord of asuras, Mars, Mercury, Venus, Saturn, all the heroic deities, The one to whom all gods paid homage, Untainted by worldly things.
You are the person supreme in the worlds, Knower of worlds, realizer of worlds, Holiest of the wise, Bestower of boons, abode, and refuge, Beyond the reach of Māra’s works, Devoid of misdeed, profound, The renowned spiritual friend.
You are the physician who removes thorns, The supreme charioteer of humans to be tamed, Astute and realized, Intelligent and adept, You are possessed of merit, the wish-fulfilling tree, Adorned with the blossoms of the factors of awakening, Replete with liberation’s fruit, The supreme embodied being, Lovely and captivating, Faultless and chaste.
You are the comet and the greatest of heavenly bodies.
You are the seer foremost among sages.
You have been consecrated as crown prince.
Foremost sovereign of the ten bhūmis, Caravan leader, best of beings, Revealing supreme nirvāṇa, You are like the sky, earth, and water.
You are like fire and wind.
You are like a wish-fulfilling jewel, Fulfilling the hopes of sentient beings.
O you to whom all living beings pay homage— Precious one, we bow to you.
Mañjuśrī spoke, saying oṃ vākyedaṃ namaḥ svāhā.
If one retains the names thus spoken Together with the vidyāmantra, One accomplishes the purification of one’s sins.
A person who recites, three times a day, These eight-more-than-a-hundred names Is certain to attain their many wishes In just the way they want them.
If they recollect the felicitous names, Any terrible acts that have been performed That equal those of immediate retribution Will be swiftly purified.
Remembering thus when great frights arise In transition to the world beyond, Those purified sentient beings Will directly encounter Mañjughoṣa.
The intelligent who, upon remembering, Compose themselves and recite Will attain buddhahood if they so desire.
Of this there is no doubt.
This concludes the noble “One Hundred and Eight Names of Mañjuśrī.”

