{{translation:{id:UT22084-056-006,key:toh138,version:1.0.26,style:plain}}}
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra
The Ratnaketu Dhāraṇī
from the Great Collection
Homage
 Homage to the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance!
Homage to the one with the melodious voice of Mahābrahmā!
Having paid homage to him, one should employ the dhāraṇī called unharmed by the assemblies of Māra. May I accomplish the following mantra:
Avāme avāme amvare amvare {TK4} parikuñja naṭa naṭa puṣkaravaha jalukha khama khaya ili mili kili mili kīrtipara mudre mudramukhe svāhā!{TK5}
Chapter 1
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling in Veṇuvana, at the Kalandakanivāpa, near the city of Rājagṛha, with a great saṅgha of a thousand monks, all of whom were noble ones. They had all exhausted defilements, were free from the afflictions, were powerful, had liberated minds, had liberated insight, were of noble birth, were great elephants, had done what needed to be done, had completed their mission, had cast off the burden, had achieved their own welfare, had severed the bonds that tied them to existence, had liberated their minds with genuine knowledge, and had perfected all mental powers. There was also a great saṅgha of ten thousand bodhisattvas, including  {TK6} the princely youth Holder of Meru’s Peak, the princely youth Varuṇamati, the princely youth Sumati, the princely youth Jayamati, the princely youth Jinamati, the princely youth Intelligent Light, the princely youth Intelligent Sky, the princely youth Intelligent Lightning, the princely youth Mañjuśrī, the princely youth Durdharṣa, the princely youth Varuṇa, the princely youth Vimala, the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, and others. Each of these ten thousand bodhisattvas had achieved acceptance, retention, and absorption. {TK7} Each possessed the wisdom that is unobscured by any phenomenon, had equal concern for all beings, had transcended all the domains of Māra, and had entered the domain of all the thus-gone ones. Each was knowledgeable, possessed great love and compassion, and was skilled in means.
At the same time, there were two wandering mendicants in the city of Rājagṛha who were learned, lucid, and intelligent, had perfected the eighteen branches of knowledge, and had five hundred servants. One was named Upatiṣya and the other Kaulita. These two were heads of their retinues and leaders of pupils. They made each other the promise that “whoever first attains the nectar shall let the other know.” {TK8}
Early the next morning, Venerable Aśvajit donned his lower and upper Dharma robes. Carrying his alms bowl, he went to the city of Rājagṛha to collect alms. The wandering mendicant Upatiṣya happened to come across Venerable Aśvajit and saw that he had entered the city of Rājagṛha to collect alms. He thought, “How is it that I have never before seen such beautiful deportment in any other mendicant, brahmin, or person as in this mendicant?  I shall go before him and ask, ‘Venerable One, who is your teacher? With whom did you go forth? Whose doctrine are you devoted to?’”
So the wandering mendicant Upatiṣya went to where Venerable Aśvajit was and engaged in a good deal of friendly conversation. They then sat down to one side. Sitting there, the wandering mendicant Upatiṣya asked Venerable Aśvajit, “Venerable One, who is your teacher? With whom did you go forth? Whose doctrine are you devoted to?”
Then Venerable Aśvajit answered the wandering mendicant Upatiṣya: {TK9}
“The son of the Śākyas has mastery over all disciplines and great austerities.
Having crossed the ocean of saṃsāra he is now free, and so liberates others.
Known as ‘Buddha,’ being unequaled in his capacity to awaken, he dries up the ocean of suffering, and now exists here in this world.
I have taken refuge in this Immaculate One and am devoted to his Dharma.” {1.1}
“What does your teacher preach? What does he teach?” asked Upatiṣya.
Venerable Aśvajit responded, “I will answer you. Venerable, listen well and bear what I say in mind. I will answer you.
“The Guide professed how the world arises caused by action and afflictions,
And he also professed the remedies for reversing such action and afflictions.
This Lord of Orators taught from his own knowledge the supreme liberation, 
Where the sufferings of birth, aging, and decline are definitely not present.” {1.2} {TK10}
When the wandering mendicant Upatiṣya heard this teaching, he purified the stainless and immaculate Dharma eye that sees phenomena. A state free from the afflictions arose, and he attained the fruit of stream entry. He then said:
“The Buddha teaches the ambrosial Dharma, a treasure to hear, that is so difficult to find.
It penetrates the truth, drying up the perpetual torrent of rebirth.
It quells the suffering of all beings.
This sublime path consists in the peerless cultivation of qualities of insight.” {1.3}
The wandering mendicant Upatiṣya then asked Venerable Aśvajit, “Venerable, where is the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha right now?”
Venerable Aśvajit answered, {TK11} “Venerable, the Blessed One is now staying in Veṇuvana, at the Kalandakanivāpa, near Rājagṛha. He is residing there with the great monastic saṅgha of one thousand monks who have gone forth and who used to have matted hair.”
Upatiṣya said, “Once I have seen my best friend and disciples, I will vow to go forth before the Blessed One.”
The wandering mendicant Upatiṣya then bowed his head to the feet of Venerable Aśvajit and circumambulated him three times. He once again departed and went to meet the wandering mendicant Kaulita. The wandering mendicant Kaulita saw the wandering mendicant Upatiṣya coming from far off and exclaimed, “Venerable, given that your faculties look so clear, that your facial complexion looks so pure, and that the tone of your skin looks so light—Venerable, you must have found the nectar!”
“So it is, Venerable One!” Upatiṣya responded. “I have found the nectar! Therefore, Venerable, listen well and bear what I say in mind. I will tell you of what I have found.” 
The wandering mendicant Kaulita then rose from his seat, draped his shawl over one shoulder, and knelt on his right knee. With palms together he bowed toward Upatiṣya and said: {TK12}
“Tell me of the path to peace and the end of anguish,
Which swiftly takes one across the ocean of the three realms of existence
While destroying the great enemy of the aggregates.
I will then set forth on the path that eliminates further origination.” {1.4}
The wandering mendicant Upatiṣya then said:
“The Guide professed how the world arises caused by action and afflictions,
And he also professed the remedies for reversing such action and afflictions.
This Lord of Orators taught from his own knowledge the supreme liberation wherein sufferings of birth, aging, and decline are definitely not present.” {1.5}
Kaulita responded:
“That sage teaches the immaculate and peaceful Dharma that serves to quell all suffering.
It quells all afflictions, negative views, and faults, and it cuts through unknowing.
He teaches that conditioned things are false and thus empty and deceptive.
Hearing this brings one to peace, so please repeat these immaculate words that he spoke.” {1.6} {TK13}
Upatiṣya said:
“The Guide professed how the world arises caused by action and afflictions,
And he also professed the remedies for reversing such action and afflictions.
This Lord of Orators taught from his own knowledge the supreme liberation
Wherein sufferings of birth, aging, and decline are definitely not present.” {1.7}
The wandering mendicant Kaulita then purified the stainless and immaculate Dharma eye that sees phenomena. As he was thus purified and his afflictions were eliminated, he attained the fruit of stream entry. Then he proclaimed: 
“This genuine conduct is a boat that liberates from, quells, and swiftly crosses the river.
This supreme wisdom pacifies the three types of suffering and crosses over saṃsāra.
If one realizes this, one will defeat the afflictions and aggregates and tame the māras.
This emancipation clears away enemies and struggles and dries up the ocean of suffering.” {1.8}
Kaulita asked, “Where is the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha right now?”
“Venerable,” Upatiṣya answered, “I have heard that the Blessed One is now staying in Veṇuvana, at the Kalandakanivāpa, near Rājagṛha, with a great saṅgha of monks and a great saṅgha of bodhisattvas. {TK14} What if we go forth in the presence of the Blessed One?”
“Venerable One,” replied Kaulita, “we should do so. With our followers in mind, let us go forth.”
The wandering mendicants Upatiṣya and Kaulita then went to their followers.
Just then in the land of Aṅga-Magadha, Māra the evil one heard that the learned, well-spoken, eloquent,  and renowned good men Upatiṣya and Kaulita, along with their followers, were on their way to take ordination under the teachings of the monk Gautama. He thought, “Alas! If those two become students of the monk Gautama, they will empty my māra realm. So I must go there and dissuade those two good men from going forth. {K1} I must make them embrace the view of the evil one.”
At the same moment, Māra, the evil one, disappeared from his abode and took on the apparel, attributes, and behavior of Venerable Aśvajit. He stood in the road before the two good men, and declared:
“What I said before about causation, using cause similes, is wrong.
I said it in order to definitively test your way of thinking.
All that I said before is nonsense, as there are no karmic causes.
How could bad or good actions possibly produce results? {1.9} {K2}
“You should promptly pursue sensual delights and seek amusements.
There is no death, nor is there birth, suffering, aging, or the hereafter, {TK15}
And there are no good or bad results generated by action, given that there are no causes or actions. 
The scion of the Śākyas teaches this for his own gain, so do not put your faith in him.” {1.10}
Upatiṣya and Kaulita then thought, “It must be Māra, the evil one, who has approached us in order to dissuade us from entering the religious life.” 
Upatiṣya turned around and addressed his followers. “Listen, my pupils, and remember the shortcomings of saṃsāra:
“The world is afflicted by old age and surrounded by death.
To eliminate them both, you must fully embrace the wandering mendicant’s life.” {1.11}
Kaulita, for his part, spoke to Māra:
“Known as the best, the Dharma captivates the minds of the wise and ends the three sufferings.
There is no one anywhere who could shake us from this knowledge.
We constantly exert ourselves  with the resolute intention to quell our craving.
How could the words of a jackal in a lion’s guise sway our minds?” {1.12}
Those gods who were able to behold truth hovered in the sky and {K3} applauded these two good men: “Good, good it is, O good men! This path whereby one leaves home to embrace the life of a wandering mendicant is eminent throughout the entire world. It quells all suffering. It is the path leading into the domain of all the thus-gone ones. {TK16} It has been explained and praised by all the blessed buddhas as the path that leads from home to the life of a wandering mendicant.”
Māra, the evil one, unhappy, dejected, and sullen, disappeared then from that very spot.
The two wandering mendicants, Upatiṣya and Kaulita, directed their gaze at their followers and said, “You ought to know, pupils, that owing to the Thus-Gone One the two of us are setting forth into the wandering mendicant’s life in order to reach the far shore of the ocean of aging, sickness, and death. Any of you who do not wish to go forth in line with the teachings of the Blessed One should turn back here and now.”
Then the five hundred pupils all said, “Whatever we know is through your authority. If the two of you are embracing the wandering mendicant’s life on account of someone great, we too shall become wandering mendicants on account of the same person.”
The two wandering mendicants Upatiṣya and Kaulita, together with their retinue of five hundred, then set out to go forth under the Blessed One. Māra, the evil one, knew this, and so he conjured up a huge chasm outside of the great city of Rājagṛha one hundred leagues deep {K4} so that the two would be unable to go before Gautama the monk. The Blessed One, however, performed a miraculous feat whereby the wandering mendicants Upatiṣya and Kaulita did not see that great chasm  and could travel by the most direct route.
Māra, the evil one, further conjured a mountain range in front of them—stable, solid, unbreakable, without valleys, singularly thick, hard, and one thousand leagues tall. {TK17} In addition, he conjured one thousand fierce lions, vicious and terrible, making a great din. But the two good men, thanks to the force of the Blessed One’s splendor and miraculous powers, did not see that mountain. Nor did they see the lions or hear their roaring. Instead, they arrived where the Blessed One was by the straightest possible route. 
The Blessed One, attended upon by a congregation of many hundreds of thousands of followers, was expounding the Dharma. “Look, O monks, at these two good men, surrounded by followers, who are the heads of their assembly!”
“We see them, O Blessed One,” they replied.
The Blessed One foresaw, “Of these two good men who are here, along with their retinues, to enter the wandering mendicant’s life by my side, one will become the best of those endowed with insight among all the hearers, {K5} and the other will become the best of those endowed with miraculous powers.”
One of the monks recited on that occasion the following stanza:
“These two learned men, along with their retinues,
Are prophesied to be benefited by the best of men
And to acquire miraculous powers and fearless insight.
I welcome them both with a feeling of growing admiration.” {1.13}
The monk then got up from his seat and, together with many other monks, householders, and wandering mendicants, welcomed the two good men and honored them. The two men, for their part, moved near to the Blessed One, bowed their heads to his feet, circumambulated him clockwise three times, and, standing before him, said, “Please allow us to go forth and bestow the monk’s ordination upon us. Close to you,  {TK18} let us practice celibacy.”
“What are your names, O noble sons?” asked the Blessed One.
Upatiṣya replied, “I am the son of the brahmin Tiṣya, and so I am called Upatiṣya. My mother’s name is Śārikā. As I was born of her, my given name is Śāriputra. {K6} I already have my parents’ permission to go forth.”
Kaulita replied, “My father’s name is Kauṇḍinya, and so I am called Kaulita. My mother’s name is Mudgalā, so the common name given to me is Maudgalyāyana. Some people know me as Kaulita, while others as Maudgalyāyana. I already have my parents’ permission to go forth.”
“Śāriputra, Maudgalyāyana, and your retinues, you may live the holy life by my side,” said the Blessed One.
This is how they went forth and received their ordination as monks.
Not long after Śāriputra, Maudgalyāyana, and their retinues had gone forth, Māra, the evil one, assuming the form of Maheśvara, stood in front of the Blessed One and said:
“Those who convey the meaning of systematic treatises and who have excelled in the fields of knowledge
Will all bow to my feet, as I am their guide.
You, Venerable Gautama, with your following of students, should promptly seek refuge in me today.
I will teach you the wide and clear path to nirvāṇa.” {1.14}
The Blessed One replied: {K7}
“Your path brings misfortune to beings and leads them to the ocean of suffering.
My path dries up the ocean of suffering for both mobile and stationary beings. {TK19}
What more then will you say, O arrogant and garrulous one with the voice of a jackal?
You are exposed! It is not in your power to play Māra’s tricks on me again.” {1.15}
Māra, the evil one, then disappeared in his form of Maheśvara, and again reappeared in front of the Blessed One in the guise of Brahmā, saying:
“As you have crushed, by means of insight, action and afflictions, the sprouts of saṃsāra,
Why, O Sage, do you still endure discomforts in this world for the sake of beings in this way? 
Master, nowhere in this world is there a qualified recipient for what you offer.
Why do you not hurry to enter nirvāṇa, leaving all ailments behind? Now is the time!” {1.16}
The Blessed One replied:
“I can see peerless beings as numerous as the sand grains in the Gaṅgā 
Who require my guidance and will be liberated by me through compassion. {K8}
If people, be they of middling, superior, or the least capability, definitely need to be liberated,
Then why, O wicked one, do you give me the hypocritical advice that I should enter nirvāṇa?” {1.17} {TK20}
Māra, the evil one, again became unhappy, dejected, and sullen. He vanished on the spot and went back to his abode. He sat there, sinking into despondency. Immediately, all the beings who inhabited Māra’s abode started asking one another, “What could be the reason that our great king just sits there, sinking into despondency? Nobody knows why.”
Then the five hundred daughters of Māra, wearing clothes and adornments most pleasing to the mind, brought flower garlands and unguents capable of giving supreme pleasure. They played celestial instruments with the most captivating sounds that totally thrill the mind, danced, and sang songs. With sounds of a great celestial orchestra composed of five types of instruments that amuse and delight, they stood in front of the evil Māra. But he, the evil one, stretched forth his arms and cried out, “Stop this noise! Stop this noise!”
At these words, the celestial nymphs fell silent for a moment, but then broke into song again, striking and strumming their instruments. At that, Māra, the evil one, once again threw up his arms and began to bellow. Seven times the nymphs began to sing, dance, and play instruments, in ways bound to give pleasure, and seven times Māra, the evil one, threw {K9} his arms in the air and hollered, “Stop this noise! Stop this noise!” Thus commanded, the nymphs fell silent. However, one nymph called Vidyudvalgusvarā bowed in the direction of the evil Māra and asked:
“O Lord, have you just seen an omen portending your death? 
Or has the world become engulfed in fire today? {TK21}
Or have you discovered an enemy stronger than you in this world?
Why are you so sad? Why won’t you have fun?” {1.18}
Māra replied:
“I have a powerful enemy who has tamed his mind.
On earth, the son of the Śākyas is trained to recognize magical tricks.
If he is not brought to ruin, then, one way or another,
He will empty my realm of desires.” {1.19}
The nymphs inquired:
“Lord, by what means, power, valor, and courage 
Can he be brought to final and complete ruin, here on this day? {K10}
Who could possess the power to dry up the ocean of craving
With its vast waters, the fetters of threefold existence?” {1.20}
Māra replied:
“His lassos are generosity, yogic discipline, intention, compassion, and aspiration.
His bow is armed with a supreme arrow aimed at the target of emptiness.
He gives instructions on how to totally extinguish conditioned existence,
Being predisposed to pacifying the pathways emerging from within saṃsāra. {1.21}
“His pupils dwell in empty towns and villages, 
Deep in the forest, or in the mountain wilderness.
With minds diligently engaged in meditation, they live in solitude
And continually strive to eliminate their faults. {1.22} {TK22}
“Two of them, Upatiṣya and Kaulita, trained by the Sage,
Have for companions their own miraculous abilities, powers, and compassion.
His Dharma, skillfully presented in ways suited to everybody in the threefold universe,
Will certainly empty my desire realm.” {1.23}
Having heard this description of the Blessed One’s virtues from the evil Māra, all of his five hundred daughters attained the bodhisattva absorption formless bolt of lightning. {K11} To offer worship to the Blessed One, they cast in his direction items such as celestial instruments, flowers, perfume, garlands, fragrant oils, adornments, and jewelry. They cast them in the direction of the Blessed One, by whose magical power these instruments  and so forth rained down onto Veṇuvana, and the daughters themselves, along with their retinues, could see it raining. Seeing that such rain was falling upon Veṇuvana, they were delighted and delighted even more.
The monks, however, became suspicious and asked the Blessed One, “How is it, O Blessed One, that such a marvelous and extraordinary rain, never seen or heard before, is showering upon Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana along with their retinues? What could be the cause of it? What is the occasion?”
The Blessed One replied, “It is not by the will of these two noble sons that this great rain of flowers and so forth is falling. Rather, it was released from the abode of the evil Māra by his five hundred daughters along with their retinues, {TK23} in order to worship me. Soon they will come here and receive from me the prophecy regarding their attainment of the unsurpassed and perfect awakening.” {K12}
The five hundred daughters of Māra, the evil one, heard the Blessed One’s discourse from his own mouth and were overjoyed. Through faith and intense joy, which they developed in his presence, they attained the absorption not losing the mind of awakening. Subsequently, right there in Māra’s abode, they each donned a robe of a single piece of material, and they placed their right knees on the ground, folded their hands, and, looking in the direction where the Blessed One was seated, said:
“The river of craving of the entire world has completely dried up.
As the single eye, seeing the world that has defective eyes,
You are presently the savior of the world with its humans and gods.
How, O sage, can we swiftly become buddhas in this world? {1.24}
“You are worshiped by gods and humans, O Blessed One, as you proclaim the absolute truth.
Through your magical power, may each of us leave behind vile womanhood
And swiftly come into your presence, O high-minded one!
Then, we shall listen to the teachings of the lord of sages. {1.25}
“You, O Blessed One, are a proponent of no-self who beholds the absolute truth.
You are a lamp of immaculate speech who upholds the jewel of the limbs of awakening.
Having defeated the forces of Māra, you are without equal. {K13}
Please prophesy now our swift and collective attainment of buddhahood.” {1.26}
The daughters then rose from their seats and, in one voice, said this to Māra, the evil one: {TK24}
“How could you, O ill-willed one, be so wicked minded in the presence of the Blessed One,
Having yourself attained only a fickle and worthless glory?
Every living body is attended upon by the suffering of birth and so forth.
Tainted by pride, you will fall into a terrible state of existence. {1.27}
“Therefore, have faith in the Victorious One, abandon your anger,
And pull yourself out of the mire of pride, the fault of saṃsāra.
He knows the nature of all beings.
Come, let us promptly go to the compassionate one and follow his way.” {1.28}
But the evil Māra, his mind absolutely corrupted, thought this: “I must now think of such force, within the power of Māra, that these five hundred along with their retinues will each be snared and bound with five fetters and turned back at this very point, not being able to proceed any further.”
However, Māra was unable to bind them. Why was that? Because these five hundred with their retinues had been blessed by the Thus-Gone One. He was unable to stop them, and the five hundred, along with their retinues, went before Māra, the evil one, {K14} who became even more enraged. He thought, “I must now think of such force, within the power of Māra, {TK25} that this entire area becomes covered in thick black clouds and pummeled by violent gusts of wind, so that they get lost wandering in all directions with their retinues and, unable to see the monk Gautama, will return to my abode.”
However, because of the power of the Buddha’s blessing, he was unable to raise sufficient wind to stir even a single hair tip, not to mention anything more. The evil Māra then became even more unhappy, dejected, and sullen. Crying, he bellowed in a forceful voice  to the hosts of his sons along with their retinues, engulfing the entire abode of Māra with these words:
“Come here, dear children, along with your retinues!
We are being banished from our domains and deprived of our strength and magical powers.
Born in this world, with a nature like a poisonous tree,
The son of the Śākyas is a sweet-talking deceiver.” {1.29}
At these words, all of Māra’s daughters and servant girls, as well as all {K15} his sons with their retinues, {TK26} making haste, swiftly approached and stood in front of Māra, the evil one. There was in that gathering a son by the name Jayamati. With folded hands he inquired:
“Why are you so sad, with your mind so dejected and infuriated?
There is no fire here, like at the end of an eon, nor are you passing from here.
You have no enemy that is rising to power.
Why are you so confused? Why are you so preoccupied about someone else?” {1.30}
Māra replied:
“Don’t you see the son of the Śākyas sitting in the shade of the commoners’ tree?
Then why do you say here in front of me that I have no powerful enemy?
That powerful rogue has misled everybody in various ways.
Because of that we and our sons and legions are scorched by fire with flaming tongues. {1.31}
“The most prominent people of this world, whose fame and glory are widely celebrated,
Learned people who study and excel in sciences, poetry, and composition, {TK27}
Have readily taken refuge in the son of the Śākyas, pulled in by the Dharma hook he casts.
Thus this enemy of mine, attractive in body but wicked in mind, has gained in prominence. {1.32} {K16}
“Even my beloved retinue, having heartlessly abandoned me
After being entrusted to me, have now taken refuge in that monk.
That rogue will empty the entire threefold universe with his magic
If we don’t reduce him to ashes here and now by using force and acting quickly.” {1.33}
All the sons of Māra with their numerous retinues folded their hands and promised, “We will do it. What we can do is put on a display of our magical powers, strength, dominion,  authority, and miracles. If we are able to turn the son of the Śākyas to ashes, that’s good. If we are unable to, we shall take refuge in him. You yourself, O Father, have witnessed that we, surrounded by our huge army, have previously been defeated by the son of the Śākyas acting alone, without a companion, using merely his magical powers. What then can we expect if he is surrounded by his followers?”
Māra, the evil one, replied, “You should go anyway, my good sons! If you manage to kill that monk Gautama, come back again. If you can’t manage this, you should still return, as we will have to defend our abode.” {TK28}
Then Māra’s twelve trillion attendants, {K17} in a formation stretching upward for more than three hundred and twenty leagues and spreading over an area of thousands of leagues, displayed the magical power and speed of Māra’s army. They filled the entire space over the four continents with thick black clouds and struck the king of mountains, Sumeru, with their hands, releasing black tornadoes and lightning bolts and making all the four continents shake violently. They uttered the most terrifying cries. Subsequently, the nāgas, great nāgas, yakṣas, and great yakṣas assembled in the sky when they witnessed that the entire great earth with its rocks, mountains, and mountain ranges—including even Sumeru, the king of mountains—was quaking, and that the lakes, great lakes, rivers great and small, and the great oceans were churning. The great assembly of Māra’s followers stood on top of Mount Sumeru, conjured up rain pellets one league in size, and released them onto the country of Aṅga-Magadha. They also conjured up and released a great rain of swords, clubs, stones, lances, javelins, razor blades, razors mounted on objects, razor-like objects, adzes mounted on objects, adze blades, and terrible wheels armed with teeth—a downpour of solid, hard, rough objects.
At this time, the Blessed One entered the absorption grinding the hosts of Māra. Through  its blessing power the whole rain of stones and weapons {TK29} turned into a rain of celestial flowers, such as lotuses and water lilies in white, red, and blue varieties and flowers of the coral tree and the great coral tree.{K18} He also transformed through his blessing all the different yells and noises into melodious sounds, the sounds of the Buddha, the Dharma, the Saṅgha, the perfections, the superknowledges, the state of not turning back, consecration, victory over the four māras, going to the seat of awakening, . . . the state of clinging to existence, and the state without clinging. All the wind, darkness, and dust settled down. All the grasses, bushes, herbs, trees, soil, rocks, and mountains—whatever there were in the four continents—turned into the seven precious gems by the power of his blessing. 
The Blessed One, endowed with an uṣṇīṣa that is not fully visible, extended his control by means of his body as far as the realm of Brahmā. From each of the Blessed One’s major marks a light issued forth of such a kind that the world spheres of the great trichiliocosm became clearly and distinctly visible, illuminated by their great radiance. And whatever gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, pretas, piśācas, kumbhāṇḍas, humans, nonhuman beings, animals, {TK30} and denizens of the hells and the realms of Yama there were in the great trichiliocosm, all were able to see the Blessed One. Many hundreds of thousands of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and human and nonhuman beings arrayed in the sky threw flowers, circumambulated the Blessed One clockwise, praised him, and bowed to him. Many hundreds of thousands of millions of hell beings,  animals, and denizens of Yama’s realms attained recollection. Recollecting the roots of virtue planted in former lives, they chanted, “Homage to the Buddha!” {K19} Having died and transmigrated from the lower realms, they were reborn as gods.
Twenty-two hundred thousand of the soldiers of Māra, along with their numerous retinues, witnessed this display of miracles by the Blessed One and developed deep faith in his presence. They approached him accompanied by the five hundred daughters of Māra. Together they bowed their heads to the Blessed One’s feet and with folded hands uttered these stanzas for him:
“O you with a pure and supremely beautiful form,
You are an ocean of wisdom, you are like a golden Mount Sumeru!
Your shining fame spreads throughout the world.
To you, our protector, we go for refuge. {1.34}
“For those who have lost the way and whose eyes are closed,
You brightly shine your guiding light, like the sun in this world.
You are a unique kinsman, an unconquerable supporter of life.
To you, our leader, we go for refuge. {1.35} {TK31}
“You have auspiciously gathered the accumulations and are a treasury rich with wisdom.
Having the nature of space, your mind is originally free.
Your heart is filled with compassion, and your lovely speech captivates the mind.
To you, who accomplishes all purposes, we go for refuge. {1.36}
“You deliver beings from the wasteland of saṃsāra,
Showing them the causes and results of accumulated action. {K20}
Knowing the supreme method, you live the life of loving kindness.
To you, who lives the life of compassion, we go for refuge. {1.37}
“In this existence, illusory as the moon reflected in water,
With your senses unattached to objects,
You destroy, O protector of the world, the disease of ignorance.
To you, the king of physicians, we go for refuge. {1.38}
“You serve as a bridge, saving beings from the midst of the four rivers
By means of the seven spiritual treasures practiced by the noble ones.
You show the right path, O kinsman of the world!
We worship you, the compassionate one in this world. {1.39}
“As we were nasty to you, a being of superior intelligence,
We now ask your forgiveness.
Receiving such insults like a hero, O protector, 
You are a unique kinsman, the best in the world. {1.40}
“Having now repelled the faction of Māra, 
We give rise to the supreme mind of awakening.
We invite all beings, as we pledge {K21}
To attain supreme awakening for their sake. {1.41} {TK32}
“Please teach us the noble conduct
Whereby we can practice the perfections,
Since beings attain awakening when endowed 
With qualities taught by none other. {1.42}
“May the flowers that we cast forth remain, as parasols,
Above the heads of the best among the two-legged creatures
In the buddha fields in all directions,
So that these fields may be sources of pleasure in all seasons.” {1.43}
All the sons and daughters of Māra, together with their numerous retinues, then sprinkled flowers over the Blessed One. Through the Blessed One’s magical power, however, the scattered flowers turned into many thousands of millions of billions of flower parasols, exceeding in number even the sand grains in the Gaṅgā. The flower parasols remained in midair above the crowns of the heads of all the living buddhas in the ten directions.
The daughters of Māra with their retinues beheld {K22} these flower parasols positioned above the crowns of the heads of the living blessed buddhas, who were expounding the Dharma, surrounded by their followers, in innumerable and infinitely vast buddha fields in every direction. They were all sitting down, resplendent with light. They all had the same color, attributes, form, and appearance. {TK33} The only differences that the daughters could see were among the individual lion thrones of these blessed buddhas, their retinues, and the marvelous characteristics of their individual buddha fields. They also heard the stanzas recited by the blessed buddhas to the sound of lutes.
And so this retinue of Māra, having seen such a miraculous display through the power of the Blessed One, developed strong faith. They bowed their heads to his feet and sat down in front of him to listen to the Dharma.
However, from among Māra’s sons, along with their retinues, ten trillion returned back to Māra’s abode and relayed to Māra, the evil one, this detailed account: “We weren’t able to harm even a single pore of the skin of that monk Gautama, let alone kill him. And furthermore, twenty thousand of your children have taken refuge with him and are now sitting in front of him to hear the Dharma.”
The evil Māra, enraged, unhappy, dejected, and even more sullen, lamented:
“My good fortune has left me and will not return
Until we bring ruin upon this son of the Śākyas. {K23}
Silent we stand with this sole problem in our minds:
‘How can we kill the son of the Śākyas?’ ” {1.44}
Then Māra, the evil one, sat down, sinking into despondency.
Here ends the first chapter, “The Intimidation of Māra,” from the Mahāyāna sūtra [called] “Ratnaketu.” {K24} {TK34}
Chapter 2
The daughters and sons of Māra, accompanied by their retinues, said to the Blessed One, “The extent to which the Thus-Gone One is endowed with means and wisdom is incredible! We seek, O Blessed One, the same sort of Dharma vehicle, wisdom, magical powers, compassion, means, and eloquence. What are the qualities, O Blessed One, that a person should have in order to not fall into the hands of evil companions, but instead swiftly realize unsurpassed and perfect awakening?”
“O noble sons and daughters,” replied the Blessed One, “should any person in this world be endowed with four qualities, they will not fall into the hands of evil companions, but instead swiftly realize unsurpassed and perfect awakening. What are these four?
1. “My friends, a noble son or daughter must not be attached to any phenomenon. They must never grasp, hold on to,  dwell upon, conceptualize, or falsely identify any phenomenon, so that when they are training in the perfection of generosity, they neither reject nor grasp at the fruit of generosity, hold on to it, dwell upon it, conceptualize it, nor falsely identify it. [And so this continues] up to not conceptualizing or falsely identifying when practicing the perfection of insight.
2. “Another quality, my friends, {TK35} is that a noble son or daughter must not profess the independent existence of beings, the vital principle, an individual soul, {K25} or personhood, must not be attached in their minds . . . and must not conceptualize or falsely identify the realm of beings.
3. “Another quality, my friends, is that a noble son or daughter must not be attached to . . . and must not conceptualize or falsely identify forms, sounds, smells, flavors, or tactile perceptions.
4. “Another quality, my friends, is that a noble son or daughter must not be attached to . . . and must not conceptualize or falsely identify the arising of the body based on the ripening of results dependent on causes, which happens throughout the three times and the threefold universe wherever there are the aggregates and the organs and objects of the senses.
“And why is that? It is because omniscient wisdom, devoid of all dualistic concepts and speculation with regard to the domain of conduct, is developed by means of the yoga of non-observation. Neither phenomena nor omniscience, my friends, have any existence as separate entities. They make no sound, are signless, are not imperishable, are wishless, are not subject to arising or cessation, and have no characteristics. They are unobstructed, imperceptible, and cannot be shown. They are void, without self, and without characteristics. They are momentary, calm, neither dark nor light, and without location, and they are neither sense objects nor faculties. They are neither friendly nor hostile, are inconceivable, and cannot be taken away. They are free from selfishness {TK36} or mental elaboration, are stainless,  and have no component parts. They are not anything in particular, not agents, devoid of sensations, and without support. They are ungraspable, cannot be cognized, do not appear discretely, and are not momentary. Omniscience, my friends, is sky-like and empty. Being emptiness, it should be engaged in by applying nonperception, nondwelling, nonattachment, nonconceptuality, and nonspeculation. {K26}
“Endowed with these four qualities, my friends, a person will not fall into the hands of evil companions but instead swiftly realize unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Anyone who seeks omniscient wisdom by treating sense objects as specifically located and characterized by being objects of attachment becomes bogged down in duality. A mind bogged down in duality is conceptual and contradicts omniscience. What is this duality?
“When one dwells upon the aggregates, elements, and sense bases, by analyzing them according to their characteristics and becoming attached to them, this is duality and it runs counter to omniscience.
“Duality is conceptualizing the nexus of one’s conduct and its fruits. Duality is conceptualizing the nexus of appropriation, becoming, and birth of beings. Duality is conceptualizing the nexus of instruction, elucidation, discourse, terminology, and language. Duality is conceptualizing the nexus of knowledge consisting in eternalistic and nihilistic views, and subjects of knowledge. Duality is conceptualizing the nexus of notions that postulate a being, a vital principle, an individual soul, a person, an agent, or an instigator of action. Also, if somebody dwells upon and conceptualizes the nexus of this shore and the other, {TK37} and of thoughts and delimitations, this is duality.
“My friends, if any person who seeks omniscience dwells upon, conceptualizes, speculates about, or gets attached to the analysis of the arising and cessation of the thoughts ‘I’ and ‘my’ throughout the three times,  this is duality pertaining to omniscience.
“It is as if somebody {K27} would get hold of soil when they need fire, would get hold of fire when in need of drink, would get hold of a stone when in need of food, would get hold of garments when in need of flowers, would get hold of a corpse when in need of perfume, would get hold of rocks when in need of clothes, and would get hold of space when in need of scented oils. In this way, my friends, if anybody seeks omniscient wisdom while steeped in duality arising through the analysis of and attachment to the mastery of conduct, their endeavors will be fruitless.”
There was, seated among this assembly, a bodhisattva by the name Dhāraṇamati. Folding his hands in the direction of the Blessed One, he bowed and asked, “Is it possible to realize that which is inexpressible?”
“Only one who knows the inexpressible is realized,” said the Blessed One. “Therefore, O noble son, I will ask you something. Answer according to your degree of acceptance. If you are able to explain this, please do. Is there a substance, characteristic, or entity that is called ‘omniscience’?”
 “If I were to say that there is,” replied Dhāraṇamati, “this would be an eternalist view. If I were to say that there isn’t, this would be a nihilist view. In the middle way nothing can be apprehended: omniscience neither exists nor does not exist. Perfect realization is the understanding of the nature that is unobstructed, unarisen, {TK38} unceasing, immeasurable, incalculable, without darkness, and without light.”
“Perfect awakening, O Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva Vidyunmati, “is the ability to gain realization where there is neither coming nor going.” 
“Perfect awakening, O Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva Vairocana, “is the state that is characterized neither by attainment nor nonattainment. It is not an intuitive grasp or an intuitive perception, nor is it tranquility or complete tranquility. Neither is it the three times, {K28} the three vehicles, aspiration, civility, or conceitedness.” 
“Perfect awakening, O Blessed One,” said Dhāraṇamati, “is the state where one does not conceptualize or speculate about the threefold universe, the three fetters, the three types of knowledge, the three vehicles, the five aggregates, the elements, or the sense bases. It is a state where there is no increase or decrease and that is not subject to deterioration.”
“Perfect awakening,” said the bodhisattva Vajramati, “is the state where one does not conceptualize, speculate about, or defer to the teachings, whether those of ordinary people, the noble ones, the students, the adepts, the hearers, or those of the solitary buddhas.” 
“Perfect awakening,” said the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati, “is the state where, in the mode of disengagement, {TK39} one does not analyze suchness.”
“Perfect awakening,” said the bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi, “is the state where, for the sake of accomplishing or realizing the unborn characteristic of all phenomena, one does not conceptualize.”
“Perfect awakening,” said the bodhisattva Acintyamati, “is the state where one does not try to apprehend, through mental analysis, the two minds—the one that ponders the threefold universe and the one that ponders the analyzing mind.”
“Perfect awakening,” said the bodhisattva Arivijaya,  “is the state where one does not cling to, does not become seduced by, {K29} indifferent to, angry at, desirous of, or deluded by, and does not grasp at or reject any phenomenon.”
“Perfect awakening,” said the bodhisattva Padmagarbha, “is the state where one is not attached to either virtue or vice and, through entering profound acceptance, does not conceptualize ‘I’ or ‘my.’ ”
“Perfect awakening,” said the princely youth Candraprabha, “is the state where one realizes all phenomena to be the same as the reflection of the moon in water and perceives the nature of phenomena as neither increasing nor decreasing.”
“Perfect awakening,” said the princely youth Khagamati, {TK40} “is when there is no darkness, light, arising, decay, increase, or decrease within mind and mental states.”
“Perfect awakening,” said the bodhisattva Maitreya, “is the state where one neither apprehends nor attempts to become equal to the Brahmās that abide in the three realms of existence, wherever or whether they abide.”
“Perfect awakening,” said the bodhisattva Akṣayamati, “is the state where, by purifying the three spheres, one cultivates the perfections while knowing that there is no reality to them, and one is therefore neither attracted to nor indifferent to them.”
“Perfect awakening, O Blessed One,” said the princely youth Mañjuśrī, “is the state where one is neither attracted to nor indifferent to phenomena and knows the profound doctrine of the Dharma. One neither exerts oneself nor remains inert with regard to that which one cognizes. Nor does one accept or reject it. One does not accumulate, {K30} lose, generate knowledge of, relinquish, destroy, diminish, or increase any phenomena. By not conceptualizing things,  one stops the afflictions. It is by this single principle that one realizes omniscient wisdom.”
The bodhisattva Kautūhalika then asked, “How, O Mañjuśrī, should one apply the practices whereby one actualizes this single principle and {TK41} subsequently acquires omniscient wisdom by cultivating profound emptiness?”
Mañjuśrī replied, “The following, noble children, are twenty methods for attaining omniscient wisdom.
“One should (1) abandon wrong views and adopt right views, (2) adopt honesty and sincerity, (3) respect the teacher without being tainted by negativity, (4) be receptive to good advice, (5) adopt right livelihood, (6) cast off the fetters that bind one to saṃsāra, (7) have the same anger-free compassion for all beings, (8) take up the threefold restraint, (9) sincerely adopt undeceptive wholesome mental states, (10) avoid what is not peaceful, (11) guard the sacred Dharma, (12) never abandon any sentient being, (13) renounce all wealth, (14) give strength to the weak, (15) offer refuge and fearlessness to the frightened, (16) establish those who follow the wrong path in good behavior, (17) be gentle and patient, (18) adopt all the characteristics that curb grasping, {TK42} (19) avoid the accumulation of any impurities {K31} and darkness, and (20) give up the expectation of the personal ripening of any fruits that have been dedicated. 
“Omniscient wisdom is applied through fathoming the knowledge of the nature of the divisions of all letters, languages, sounds, speech, and descriptive words. One has mastered the method of omniscience when one gains knowledge through fathoming the nature of the doctrine of all the thus-gone ones and of other religious doctrines; the nature of all conduct; the nature of applying all the merit and the perfection of insight; the nature of clinging, arising, and cessation; and the nature of the three emancipations, the abodes, the causes, action, and all phenomena.”
“It is so, Mañjuśrī!” exclaimed the bodhisattva Kautūhalika. “When one fully understands this profound Dharma principle, one does not see anyone who teaches the Dharma, anywhere it is taught, any meanings, words, and letters by means of which it is taught, or any Dharma that is taught. Nor does one consider which Dharma one should abandon, which to practice, or which to understand thoroughly. The one who can fathom the true nature of things as being inexpressible will realize omniscient wisdom.”
“Good! Good it is, O noble son!” said the Blessed One. “You have eloquently shown that the attainment of omniscient wisdom can only happen through this single principle. {TK43} Why is that? It is because all phenomena, when they are not mere imputations, have an ultimate reality of neither arising nor decaying. Their ultimate reality is the nonarising of either ignorance or nirvāṇa and the nonarising of either space or nirvāṇa. Ultimately all phenomena are inexpressible. The same is true for all beings. {K32} Ultimately all phenomena are insubstantial and all are explained in terms of things coming together. Ultimately the three times, the threefold universe, and all the aggregates are  nothing whatsoever. Ultimately, the three formations are empty. In their ultimate reality, the congeries of phenomena, ripening fruits of actions, accumulations, and dissolutions are insubstantial. Bodhisattva great beings attain omniscience when they are fully endowed with the understanding that all phenomena are ultimately empty and their meaning is inexpressible.”
At this time, while this explanatory discourse on acquiring omniscient wisdom was being presented, Māra’s twenty thousand daughters and sons, along with their retinues, gained acceptance that phenomena are unborn. Accordingly, having renounced their gross physical forms, they attained mental bodies. Another twenty-eight thousand beings also gained acceptance that phenomena are unborn. Eighteen trillion gods and humans of many different types obtained the bodhisattva’s acceptance, {TK44} absorption, and various dhāraṇīs.
Subsequently, these twenty thousand bodhisattva great beings, who gained acceptance that phenomena are unborn, sprinkled celestial flowers toward and upon the Blessed One and, bowing their heads to his feet, said, “You see, O Blessed One, how beings attach no importance to the roots of virtue that lead to the accumulation of merit because of associating with nonvirtuous companions.” {K33}
“This indeed ought to be understood as the karmic precondition,” the Blessed One agreed. And in order to remove the doubts of these astonished beings, he shared the following episode from one of his previous lives:
“In the distant past, O noble children, many immeasurable eons ago, in this world sphere consisting of the four continents, during the great eon called Glorious, when people lived sixty-eight thousand years, there was a thus-gone one by the name Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance. He was a blessed buddha who was learned and virtuous, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, an unsurpassed being, a charioteer  who guides beings, and a teacher of gods and humans. In the world of that time, afflicted with the five degenerations, he taught to a fourfold assembly the Dharma that comprises the three vehicles. {K34}
“At that time there also lived a king by the name Utpalavaktra, a universal monarch ruling over the four continents. On one occasion, accompanied by his harem and army, he came to the place where the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance stayed. {TK45} Having bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One, he besprinkled him with flowers and worshiped him further with the sounds of various instruments, fragrances, and incense. He circumambulated him clockwise thrice, bowed his head to the feet of the assembly of his monks, and praised the Blessed One with these two stanzas:
“ ‘O remover of many faults, you are praised
By the exceedingly virtuous gods, nāgas, and others!
O benefactor of beings with the aid of the seven spiritual treasures,
Please explain how one attains a subtle mind! {2.1} {K35}
“ ‘O remover of the world’s darkness and bringer of the light of peace,
Destroyer of transmigration and birth, and pacifier of the suffering of death,
You who turn beings back from the path of the less fortunate realms,
Please explain how to be released in this world from Māra’s ways!’ {2.2}
“In reply, O noble children, the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance said this to King Utpalavaktra:
“ ‘A person becomes a bodhisattva with a subtle mind when endowed with three qualities. What are these three? (1) Out of a pure motivation, one feels compassion for all beings. (2) Like a mother, one strives to remove their suffering. (3) One equally views all phenomena as being without self, the vital principle, or individuality and as being nondifferentiable and uncaused. Endowed with these three qualities, a good person will become a bodhisattva with a subtle mind.
“ ‘When endowed with another three qualities, O King,  one will not become trapped in the snares of Māra. {TK46} What are these three? {K36} (1) One does not get angry with any sentient being and does not look for an opportunity to attack. (2) One sees all beings as equally worthy of generosity. (3) One examines all phenomena according to the single principle, and consequently views them as being the same as space—unfabricated, nondifferentiable, unborn, nonarising, and unceasing—and realizes them, without apprehending them, to be just like space in being devoid of any characteristics of substantiality. With these three qualities, O King, a good person will not get entrapped in the snares of Māra and will be released from his ways.’
“Now the chief queen of King Utpalavaktra, Surasundarī by name, served by a retinue of eighty-four thousand women, approached the blessed, thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance and, sprinkling him with various flowers, uttered the following stanzas:
“ ‘O unequaled one, remover of darkness endowed with unique qualities,
Destroyer of transmigration! Please explain how a young woman may,
In this world, become a man, once purged of her less fortunate birth.
O bringer of sublime benefits, gentle and disciplined in mind! {2.3}
“ ‘O well-gone one who follows the highest course! He who pacifies and delights, {K37}
Blessed One! How does a young woman give up her inferior birth and become a man in this world?
Please explain this, O gentle and disciplined one who benefits others.
Remove my mental darkness, right here and now. {2.4} {TK47}
“ ‘O monk, unequaled in this world,
Supreme receptacle of many renowned qualities, mindfulness, and discipline,
Promptly explain, O dispeller of darkness, the way in this world
Whereby I could obtain a male birth—the elixir of happy migrations.’ {2.5}
“Thus addressed, O noble children, the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance addressed Surasundarī, the chief queen:
“ ‘There is, O sister, a method whereby a woman may easily change her female sex. Her previously acquired female sex  will promptly disappear without a trace, and until the final nirvāṇa, she will not obtain a female form again, unless she aspires otherwise. So, sister, what is this method through which a woman may swiftly become a man and that causes her female sex to promptly disappear? For this, O sister, there is a dhāraṇī called Ratnaketu. It has great magical power, is highly beneficial, and is very powerful. It completely dispels the condition of being a woman and removes, without residue, all depravities of the body, speech, and mind that ripen as suffering. 
“ ‘Through merely hearing this dhāraṇī, the state of being a woman will disappear without leaving a trace. The female sex organs will disappear and male ones will appear. {TK48} Also, the resulting male body will be beautiful in form {K38} and complete in every limb. He will be honest, skilled in subtle wisdom, and able to accomplish his tasks, whether they are physical, verbal, or mental. He will follow the right conduct and will defeat all his enemies. And whatever fruits of bad actions may have been ripened for him and would be experienced as suffering with respect to the body, speech, or mind, whether in this or future lives, all of them will be dispelled, unless he has committed any of the five acts of immediate retribution, opposed the sacred Dharma, or reviled a noble one. However, the female sex of such evildoers would disappear, too. With regard to the residual womanhood that has persisted throughout consecutive lives, reactivated by its latent seeds that ripen to be experienced as suffering—womanhood resulting from the physical, verbal, and mental depravities and arising out of the karmic obscurations thus acquired—even if this residual womanhood were as big as Mount Sumeru, it would all dissipate completely. Why is this?
“ ‘It is because this dhāraṇī, Ratnaketu by name, has been taught and blessed by all the thus-gone, worthy, perfect  buddhas of bygone times, thus bringing mutual joy to them and the reciters. It has been praised, extolled, and described in superlative terms as the means for eliminating action that would ripen as the suffering of beings, {K39} and for increasing their roots of virtue. 
“ ‘Whatever thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas there are presently in the ten directions, dwelling in their respective buddha fields, all of them teach this Ratnaketu dhāraṇī while recommending it as the means for eliminating bad action and increasing the roots of virtue of the beings in their buddha fields. And whatever thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas will exist in the future in the ten directions, {TK49} in their respective places they also will teach this Ratnaketu dhāraṇī while recommending it as the means for eliminating action that would ripen for beings as suffering, and of increasing their roots of virtue. I also will presently teach the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī. Rejoicing in its being taught by the thus-gone ones arisen in the ten directions, I will praise and extol this dhāraṇī.
“ ‘O sister, if any head-anointed kṣatriya king who has achieved power and dominion writes the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī and upholds it, stanzas of praise sung for such a king will spread far and wide throughout the ten directions, filling everywhere up to the realm of form with words of praise. Many thousands of millions of billions of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas will form a chain behind this kṣatriya king, standing abreast in order to guard and protect him. All the depravities, quarrels, {K40} famine, disease,  invasions by foreign powers, untimely storms, torrential rains, and afflictions of heat and cold will completely cease in his kingdom. All the evil yakṣas, rākṣasas, lions, buffaloes, elephants, and wolves will become harmless. All the unpleasant problems experienced when coming into contact with poisonous, sharp, bitter, pungent, or tasteless {TK50} substances, or the pain felt when touching rough objects, will completely cease. All wealth, on the other hand, will increase, and all crops, medicinal herbs, forest trees, fruits, and flowers will grow in abundance and thrive, succulent and delicious in taste.
“ ‘And if this head-anointed kṣatriya king should hoist a volume containing the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī on top of a banner when engaged in battle, he will defeat the hostile army. If two head-anointed kṣatriya kings should hoist a volume containing the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī on top of a banner when engaged in mutual war, they will come to a mutually satisfying settlement. Thus, the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī brings many benefits and advantages.
“ ‘If there is any village, town, or marketplace in which untimely death or harm breaks out for humans, nonhuman beings, or animals, a volume containing the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī should be brought there and worshiped with many offerings. When it is brought, a celibate ascetic who has bathed, dried his body, and put on new garments should sit on a lion throne adorned with various flowers, censed with fragrant incense, and covered in foodstuffs of many tastes, and he should read the text aloud.
“ ‘Consequently, all the killing and untimely death will cease, and {K41} the bad omens that bring on fear and goosebumps will disappear. If any woman wishes to give birth to a son, she should commission a celibate ascetic, bathed {TK51} and dressed in clean garments, to worship this text with flowers, fragrances,  garlands, and scented oils, while himself sitting on a throne that is adorned with various flowers, censed with fragrant incense, and covered in foodstuffs of many tastes. She should have him read the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī aloud. She will give birth to a son, and her present life will be the last one as a woman until she has attained final nirvāṇa, unless she herself wishes this to be otherwise for the sake of bringing sentient beings to maturity. O sister, even by just hearing the words of the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī recited once, anyone, even deer or birds, will never again turn back from unsurpassed and perfect awakening.’ ”
Then the blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni said, “O noble children, when the big toe of thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance’s  right foot touched the ground, the earth trembled six times.”
As he said this, the thus-gone Śākyamuni blessed the earth in this buddha field so that it likewise trembled six times. Countless gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, pretas, piśācas, kumbhāṇḍas, humans, and nonhuman beings were terrified. The buddha field of the Sahā world was totally pervaded with a great light. It became as even as the palm of the hand, and the mountains, forests, walls, {TK52} Mount Sumeru, the world perimeter, and the great world perimeters all disappeared. The gods, nāgas, and yakṣas were also terrified by the trembling of the earth and the flash of light. Through the power of the Blessed One, looking into the four directions they noticed the Blessed One, the sage of the Śākyas, at about the distance of an arrow shot. They were astonished, and gazed upon the Thus-Gone One, the sage of the Śākyas, with their palms joined together. The thus-gone Śākyamuni then recited the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī:
jaloke jaloke moke jali jala jalini jalavrate jahile vara­puruṣa­lakṣaṇa­samāruhya amame vamame vamame navame mahāse jahame jahame jahame jahame varame varame vavave vavave vahave vaṅgave vajave vāra vāraśe {TK53} jala­mekha parakha ala jahili jana tule jana tubhukhe vahara vahara siṃha vrate nana tilā nana tina dālā sūrya­vihaga candravihaga cakṣu rajyati śavihaga sarva­kṣaya­stritvasura­vihaga jakhaga jakhaga surakhaga vahama amrikha amrikha amrikha amrikha amrikha amrikha amrikha amrikha mrikha mrikha mrikha vyavadeta karma dune dune utpata vyavaccheda jñāna­kṛta anuda padākhaga neruka aṅgule bhaṅgule vibhaṅgule kulaha indra­parivibhaha vyavaccheda karabha vavrati vavrati ca prati ca prati amoha darśane parivarta bhaṣyu khasama krimajyoti­khaga jahi jahi jyoti niṣka bhirasa {TK54} bhirasa bhirasa bhiraja mati­krama bhivakriva mahākriva hile hihile aruṇavarte samaya­niṣke damadāna­dhyāna aparāmṛśe phala­kuṇḍalalakhe {K42} nivarta istribhāva karma­kṣaya prādurbhava puruṣatvam asamasama samaya vidijña tathāgata svāhā!
As soon as the thus-gone Śākyamuni recited the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī, this great earth shook again. Through hearing the dhāraṇī, the five hundred daughters of Māra  lost their female sex organs and grew the corresponding male organs. The same happened to infinite numbers of girls from the realms of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, pretas, piśācas, and kumbhāṇḍas. All of them became non-returners on the path to unsurpassed and perfect awakening. For all of them, the karmic obstacle that would cause their being reborn as women in the future was {TK55} completely removed. 
All these women saluted the thus-gone Śākyamuni with folded hands and, in a strong voice, exclaimed, “Homage, homage to {K43} Śākyamuni, the miracle worker, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha! Please relate in full, O compassionate one, the episode from your past life that will explain how and why our womanhood has now disappeared and we have become men with complete male physiques. By the power of this miracle, this magical display, and our disenchantment, we have now engendered a wish to attain unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Narrate, O Blessed One, this episode from your past life, with these countless gods and humans as witnesses.”
The blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni then continued with the narration of his past life:
“Listen, good people! Together with Her Majesty Surasundarī, the chief queen of King Utpalavaktra, eighty-four thousand women from her retinue heard the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī from the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance. As soon as they heard it, {K44} their female sex organs disappeared, and the corresponding male organs appeared. Simultaneously, the same happened to infinite numbers of girls—the celestial ones, . . . up to humans and nonhumans.  {TK56} For all of them, the karmic obstacle that would cause their being reborn as women in the future was completely removed.
“When Surasundarī, the chief queen of King Utpalavaktra, along with her retinue attained the state of manhood, then Utpalavaktra, the universal monarch and the ruler of the four continents, consecrated his eldest son to kingship and, together with his remaining nine hundred and ninety-nine divinely beautiful august sons, eighty-four thousand other such men, and ninety-two thousand other individuals, renounced worldly life and, {K45} in the presence of the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance, they shaved off their hair and beards and donned monk’s robes, embracing, with complete faith, the life of an ascetic who goes forth from home to homelessness. Having thus become a wandering mendicant, he engaged in inward contemplation and took delight in reciting prayers.
“At that time many tens of millions of beings wondered why their king, the universal monarch, had become a wandering mendicant. They remarked to each other, ‘That thus-gone one is a rogue and a trickster who engages in the works of Māra. He preaches a doctrine that is linked to Māra’s activity. From some he removes their female sex organs, and from some the male. He shaves off the hair and beards of some. To some he gives dyed robes and to others white. To some he gives teaching so that they may obtain birth as a god; to some, birth as a human; to some, birth as an animal; to some, birth as a preta; to some, birth as a hell being; and to some, the ending of birth, death, and transmigration altogether. That monk Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance, {TK57} engaged in the conduct of Māra, duplicitous in having contacts with women, is breaking his vows while assuming the appearance of a monk. For that reason we should now depart from this place so that we do not have to witness his stealing of sexual organs or hear his teachings.’
“Among those who were talking in this manner there was a soldier by the name of Kumārabhṛta. He said, ‘All my wives, daughters, and women of the harem {K46} had their female sex organs removed and male organs magically planted by that rotten monk. All of them had their heads shaven and were then given dyed robes by him. And I am left alone, lost in grief. Let us all gather together and go into the rugged wilderness where we will not hear the sound or talk of that fake and rotten monk who employs Māra’s snares. Let us reconnoiter first.’
“Enthusiastically, they all replied, ‘Let’s do so!’
“The soldier Kumārabhṛta then set forth together with those many tens of millions of individuals, who were full of doubt, to a place on the outer fringes of inhabited lands, deep in the rugged mountain wilderness. There, he lived the life of a sage, preaching the following doctrine to all those people:
“ ‘There is no liberation from saṃsāra and no ripening of the results of good or bad actions. There is, at this time, a monk who preaches nihilism—a vow breaker {TK58} who indulges in the activities of Māra. Those who approach him for an audience, salute him, and listen to his teachings become mentally distracted. He shaves their heads, causes them to leave home, gives them dyed robes, and has them live in cemeteries. He forces them to beg and allows them to eat only once a day. Because of him their minds are warped by wrong views and they are continually upset. They are content to live in seclusion and make do without bedsteads. He also deprives them of sensory and erotic pleasures, dance, {K47} song, perfume, scented oils, ornaments, jewelry, and sexual relationships. He forbids them to drink liquor or wine and allows them to eat only a little. Doing such, he is an enemy of beings who preaches nihilism in the guise of a monk while engaging in the ways of Māra. I have exposed the acts of this monk, Gautama, which were previously unheard of and unseen.’
“Through this speech of Kumārabhṛta many hundreds of thousands of millions of beings fell for his evil views.
“Subsequent to this, the great monk Utpalavaktra heard that in a certain mountain wilderness  there were people who not only were established on the wrong path themselves but also induced others to adopt the same distorted views and speak badly about the Three Jewels. He thought to himself, ‘If ultimately I don’t liberate those beings from the evil of their wrong views {TK59} and don’t establish them in the right views, then my life as a monk will have become worthless. How in this blind world will I realize, in the future, the unsurpassed and perfect awakening? How will I teach and ultimately liberate miserable beings caught in the snares of the four māras?’
“The great monk Utpalavaktra, steadfast, courageous, and compassionate, having then requested the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance’s permission, set forth on his journey to all those towns, villages, hamlets, and marketplaces located in the rugged mountain wilderness in the frontier areas. Traveling through all these places in the company of hundreds of thousands, he taught the Dharma to all those misguided beings. He made those beings turn away from the evil of their wrong views, set them on the path of the right views, and established them on the path to unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Some he established in the aspiration toward the vehicle of the solitary buddhas, some toward the vehicle of the hearers, and some he established in the fruit itself. Some he induced to take up the life of renunciation. Some he established in the vows of a lay practitioner, some in the vows of fasting and abstinence, and some in the vows of the threefold refuge. To women {K48} he taught the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī, {TK60} thus preventing them from becoming women again and establishing them in the state of manhood.
“With regard to the many tens of millions of beings who harbored doubts when being near the Thus-Gone One, he made all of them turn away from the evil of their wrong views, taught them the perils of vice, and established them on the path to unsurpassed and perfect awakening. He brought them into the presence of the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance where they all, except for the soldier Kumārabhṛta,  took up the life of renunciation. Kumārabhṛta, for his part, made the following aspiration:
“ ‘As the monk Utpalavaktra is leading my followers astray, may I become a māra in the buddha field where he is to attain unsurpassed and perfect awakening so that I will be able to harm him from the moment he enters the womb. Later, after he is born, may I terrorize and create obstacles for him when he plays as a child, learns arts and crafts, learns to read, enjoys amorous pastimes in the harem . . . until he ascends to the seat of awakening. Should he attain awakening, may I sabotage his teachings.’
“The great monk Utpalavaktra, however, through his great courage full of effort and painful sacrifice, managed to instill faith in the soldier Kumārabhṛta, who had been so determined in his aspiration. {K49} He made him turn away from the evil of his wrong views, taught him the perils of vice, and planted in him the aspiration to attain unsurpassed and perfect awakening. {TK61} Consequently, the soldier Kumārabhṛta, now tame and faithful, made the following wish:
“ ‘O most compassionate Utpalavaktra! At the time when you have attained unsurpassed and perfect awakening, may you provide me with the prophecy of my attaining unsurpassed and perfect awakening.’
“ O good people, should you have any doubts, uncertainties, or other such thoughts, then know that Utpalavaktra, on that occasion, attended upon the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance and his retinue with manifold offerings and then left the household life and became a wandering mendicant together with hundreds of thousands of millions of beings. He turned infinite hundreds of thousands of millions of beings away from the evil of their wrong views. He set infinite numbers of beings upon the three paths and established them in the fruits thereof. For infinite hundreds of thousands of millions of women, he enabled them to attain the state of manhood.
“This may not be immediately obvious to you, but at that time, during those events, I was the king Utpalavaktra, the universal monarch  ruling over the four continents. It was I who discharged my duties as a man. And if again, O good people, you should have any doubts, uncertainties, or other such thoughts with regard to Surasundarī, the chief queen who went forth during the time those events occured, {TK62} you should know that this was the great bodhisattva Maitreya during that particular time. O good people, you may have doubts, uncertainties, or other such thoughts with regard to the soldier Kumārabhṛta and his retinue of tens of millions of beings who took part in the events of that time, {K50} as it may not be immediately obvious to you that this was Māra, the evil one, during that particular time. Because I set his followers, at that time, upon the path of renunciation, he first took umbrage with me but then made a wish that once I myself had attained unsurpassed and perfect awakening, I would prophesy the same for him.
“You, O noble children, became disaffected when you were in the presence of the thus-gone Splendorous with the Gentle Glow of Light and Fragrance. You talked without self-control and harbored wrong views. Consequently, I released you from the evil of your wrong views {TK63} and made you take up the life of renunciation. From then on you have attended upon many thousands of buddhas and worshiped them with offerings. Having learned the Dharma from them, you made aspirations and practiced the six perfections. However, because of the bad action previously accumulated by you with your body, speech, and mind, you have endured suffering for many eons in the three miserable realms. It is only because of this karmic obscuration that you were born, in your present life, in the abode of Māra, the evil one.”
While these past events concerning the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī were being narrated by the blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni, the female characteristics of the five hundred daughters of Māra vanished, and male ones appeared.  They gained acceptance that phenomena are unborn. Infinite hundreds of thousands of millions of beings beyond count, including gods, humans, {K51} and asuras, developed the wish to attain unsurpassed and perfect awakening and entered the path of no return. In this way, infinite hundreds of thousands of millions of beings entered the path of {TK64} no return of both the hearer and solitary buddha vehicles. For infinite numbers of celestial and human girls, womanhood ceased, and each became a man.
This concludes the chapter on the previous lives of the Buddha, the second in the “Ratnaketu Sūtra.” {K52} {TK65}
Chapter 3
While the Ratnaketu dhāraṇī was being recited by the thus-gone Śākyamuni, the entire Sahā world became clearly visible, illuminated by a powerful light. The one hundred billion lords of sensual pleasure, each one a māra active in one of the one hundred billion worlds of four continents in this buddha field of Śākyamuni, became alarmed by this display of the Buddha’s power and directed their eyes toward this world of four continents. “Where is this light emanating from?” they wondered. “Surely this must be through the power of Māra, the evil one, who lives in that particular world of four continents. He is stronger, mightier, and more powerful than us.”
As they looked, however, the māras saw Māra, the evil one, overcome with grief and utterly dejected. So the one billion māras went to the world of four continents where Māra, the evil one, lived and asked, “Why is it, O lord of sensual pleasures, that you are just sitting there, miserable and overcome with grief, when your entire world sphere is awash with light?” {K53}
Māra, the lord of sensual pleasures, {TK66} then explained the matter at length to the one hundred billion māras:
“As you know, friends, there is a monk from the Śākya clan,  a trickster and rogue of the worst kind. As soon as he was born here, the entire Sahā world became filled with light, shook, and trembled. Whatever intelligent beings there were in this entire world sphere—the lords of brahmās, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, mahoragas, garuḍas, kinnaras, and other intelligent human and nonhuman beings—all went to him to offer worship for the last six years. Sitting alone on his seat, without a companion, he has been creating inauspicious illusions.
“I, for my part, desirous to make a show of my military might, approached him in the company of soldiers numbering three hundred sixty billion and surrounded him with displays of power, valor, magical skill, and transformations of my entire army, but I was unable to stir or disturb even a single hair on his body, let alone dislodge him from his seat or assault him some other way. That villain, however, displayed the magical power that he did and made the earth tremble. 
“Defeated along with my military, I was like a cut-down tree, prostrate upon the surface of the earth, while he, {K54} sitting there on his seat, produced inauspicious illusions {TK67} of such a kind that my entire domain was overpowered. Having accomplished the knowledge he sought, he rose from his seat and started instructing beings. Thereupon, all the learned and knowledgeable beings in this world of four continents became astounded, so that I am unable to divine their thoughts or their future destiny within the six realms. I am unable to stir or disturb even a single hair of those who took refuge with him, let alone mislead them about him, or pry them away from him.
“And now my five hundred daughters with their retinues, as well as my twenty thousand sons with their followers, have taken refuge with that villainous monk, Gautama, and sit in front of him in order to listen to the Dharma, while I no longer have the power to persuade them to leave him. For this reason,  you, being powerful, full of merits, knowledgeable, and mighty, must help me. We need to stamp the life out of that villainous son of the Śākyas. And whatever beings have taken refuge with him, we must annihilate them too. {K55} We will defeat the black faction of that deceitful monk, and bring glory to the white faction of Māra. We will then be able to live happily ever after.”
Now, the māra Jyotiṣprabha looked toward Jambudvīpa where the Thus-Gone One {TK68} was sitting and teaching the Dharma. When he saw the Blessed One’s body and heard the sound of his Dharma talk, he was awed and the thrill of it caused the hairs on his body to stand on end. He said to Māra, the evil one:
“With his exquisite form, he stands supreme over the entire buddha field. 
He has long been purified through merit and wisdom.
Having applied himself to the path over a long time, he is free from the afflictions.
As all his links in the chain of becoming have ceased, he is free from sorrow. {3.1}
“Do not fall under the sway of anger any more—this is not right!
As the most eminent and best in the threefold universe, he is an object of refuge.
He in whom burns even a slight feeling of hatred toward him
Is deluded indeed and will be deprived of happiness in this world.” {3.2} {K56}
Then another māra, Sannimika by name, addressed Māra, the evil one, thus:
“He possesses great magical power and the excellent marks of merit.
Not stuck anywhere, he is free from all destinies.
He shows the way leading to the cessation of all suffering
And cannot possibly be harmed even by hundreds of māras.” {3.3}
The evil one replied:
“He brought my followers under his control,
And your followers will be brought under his power too.
Soon he will empty our entire domain.
Where shall we resort to after that?” {3.4} {TK69}
The māra Navarāja said this to Māra, the evil one:
“If you had superior magical power,
You would be able to prove your prowess.
Your force, however, is spent and all hope is gone.
Why, then, do you still compete with him, the Omniscient One?” {3.5}
The māra Khaḍgasoma said:
“There is no enmity in his mind toward anyone.
Purified by meditation, he does not belong anywhere.
The sphere he resides in is independent of the three realms. 
He cannot possibly be assailed by others.” {3.6} {K57}
The evil one replied:
“Whatever beings there are in the desire realm—
Attached to sense pleasures and stupefied by arrogance and pride—
They are my servants who always follow me.
How could it be impossible to kill him if we all joined forces?” {3.7}
The māra Kṣititoya said:
“Knowing that objects are without essence
Like an illusion, a mirage, or a reflected image, he has subdued his craving.
Unattached to existence, with a sky-like nature,
How could he possibly be obstructed?” {3.8}
The evil one replied:
“He also depends on things in this threefold universe;
He relies on gourmet food and drink and fine clothes, {TK70}
And the three feelings are firmly rooted in his mind.
How then could it be impossible to destroy him?” {3.9} {K58}
The māra Tṛṣṇājaha said:
“Any magical powers that exist in our domain,
Whether they are of the evil one himself or the mahoragas,
Do not even come close to the powers of Siddhartha.
How then could it be possible to destroy him?” {3.10}
The evil one replied:
“I will cut off his food supply, 
Hurl rocks at him,
And abuse him verbally—
Will he not be forced out of his living place then?” {3.11}
The māra Bodhākṣa asked:
“When you launched your assaults upon him,
Did he ever angrily show you his disapproval, 
Or show you a scowling face?
Did you directly hear any bad words from him?” {3.12}
The evil one replied:
“He always endures things patiently, considering them carefully.
He has exhausted his passions, and has no hatred or ignorance. {K59}
His mind is lovingly disposed toward all beings,
Though he is always socially engaged.” {3.13}
The māra Durdharṣa said:
“We can certainly set out to assail those
Ensnared by the three fetters, {TK71}
But how could we possibly destroy one
Who has eliminated faults and the snares of delusion?” {3.14}
The evil one replied:
“You, gentlemen, my powerful supporters,
Must stay coolheaded, right now!
I will transform the entire earth into water— 
All its quarters with their mountain ranges. {3.15}
“I will release a terrible rain of hard rocks
And heaps of iron filings.
I will throw at his body arrows, javelins,
Razor blades, and spears, to crush him into dust. {3.16}
“With these missiles emitting flames on impact
I will crush the lion of the Śākyas to dust.” {3.17}
And so this exchange between the evil one and the other māras continued until ten million stanzas were spoken by the ten million māras, after which all the māras spoke with a single voice: 
“So be it! We will go! We will now go to our individual abodes, don our armor, and come along with our military cohorts. {K60} Whatever magical powers we have at our disposal, we will display them all. You will then know for yourself, at that time, what valor the monk Gautama will exhibit.”
These tens of millions of māras {TK72} then departed for their respective homes to don their armor, each māra accompanied by tens of thousands of millions of followers. All of them donned their coats of mail, armed themselves with different types of weapons, and girded themselves with different types of body armor. As night fell, they traveled to Jambudvīpa and arrayed themselves in the sky above Aṅga-Magadha.
Any gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, pretas, piśācas, and kumbhāṇḍas in this world of four continents who harbored ill will toward the Blessed One and who had not attained respect and devotion for him and were also ill-disposed toward the Dharma and the Saṅgha were all mobilized under the command of the evil Māra for the sake of killing the Blessed One. Brandishing various weapons and types of armor, they hovered there in the sky. Māra, too, went to one side of the Himalaya Mountains where there lived,  with a retinue of five hundred, the sage Jyotīrasa, a devotee of Maheśvara who was accomplished in the eighteen branches of knowledge and who had attained excellence in the field of magical arts. Having assumed the form of Maheśvara, Māra stood before the sage and said:
“Born into the Gautama clan, the supreme sage has recourse to ordinary knowledge as well as the superknowledges. {TK73}
He lives in Magadha, where he is now doing alms rounds in the city of Rājagṛha. {K61}
You must engage him in conversation at length, being resolute in the pursuit of various topics.
You will thus certainly obtain the mastery of the five superknowledges.” {3.18}
Having spoken this stanza, Māra, the evil one, disappeared right there and, having gone to his abode, declared the following to his retinue of māras:
“Please hear from me today what an incomparable scheme I have hatched:
Those of you who are endowed with magical powers should unreservedly engage the son of the Śākyas in a friendly conversation.
If you keep your great pride, particular to māras, in check, he will not see your deception.
If you continually say nice words, he will be kind to you as one of his disciples, just like a mother is with her children. {3.19}
“When his disciples finally go undistractedly to town, 
As they do every morning, we will promptly captivate them
With the sweetest sentiments expressed through song and dance.
The bull of the Śākyas will surely lose his composure
When he hears about this event.” {3.20} {TK74}
Another māra said:
“We shall swiftly produce, outside of this town, many unpleasant sounds—
The wild and fierce sounds of lions, tigers, elephants, and camels, like roaring summer thunder. {K62}
We shall wait with our weapons at the ready, so that he will see the miraculous display with his own eyes.
Baffled, he will lose his magical power and flee, losing his bearings and sense of direction.” {3.21}
Another māra said: 
“Standing in great numbers by the four gateways straddling the four main roads with contorted faces,
Brandishing various weapons—sharp spears, arrows, barbed missiles, and swords—
We shall attack from the sky with loud shrieks, releasing bolts from the clouds.
Terrified by the earthquakes, he will soon lose all control and meet his doom.” {3.22}
And, as far as the extent of the māras’ magical power would allow, they enacted everything in full. The Blessed One, however, turned this entire world sphere—the great trichiliocosm—into diamond. Subsequently no māras were able to make any sounds, and no mountains of fire stood in the four directions.  There were no black clouds {TK75} and no unseasonable winds. No nāga was able to send even a single drop of rain—all this through the power of the Buddha’s blessing.
Around that time, in the morning, four great hearers put on their lower garments and robes and, bearing their alms bowls, entered the great city of Rājagṛha to beg alms. Venerable Śāriputra entered the city through the southern gate to beg alms. {K63} There, in the city, fifty māra youths, endowed with supreme youthful beauty, attired to resemble sons of distinguished personages, roamed about dancing and singing. They seized Venerable Śāriputra by both hands and pranced along the street. Dancing and singing, they urged him, “Dance, monk! Sing, monk!” 
Śāriputra replied, “Listen, friends, as I sing you a song that you have not heard before.” 
All the māra youths, moving onward, then sang the following in unison with Śāriputra:
“Enough of the sense bases;
We are deceived by them.
Sense bases are killers;
I will put an end to them. {3.23} {TK76}
“Enough of the aggregates;
We are deceived by them.
Aggregates are killers; I
will put an end to them. {3.24}
“The mantra is:
bahara bahara bhārabaha marīci­baha satya­baha āmabaha svāhā!”
Elder Śāriputra sang this stanza and recited the words of the mantra while bounding along with the fifty māra youths, who, supremely thrilled and kindly disposed, said: {K64}
“We now ask you, our protector, for forgiveness.
You are truly a kinsman of beings, a great teacher.
We will always bear witness to the fact
That the aggregates are fraught with danger, just as you have declared.” {3.25}
They all bowed their heads to the feet of Śāriputra  and sat down in front of him, in the middle of the street, to hear the Dharma.
Around the same time, the great Venerable Maudgalyāyana entered the great city of Rājagṛha through the eastern gate, in order to beg alms. But as before, fifty māra youths sang the following in unison with Maudgalyāyana:
“Enough of the elements;
We are deceived by them.
The elements are killers;
I will put an end to them. {3.26} {TK77}
“Enough of sensations;
We are deceived by them.
Sensations are killers;
I will put an end to them. {3.27}
“Enough of intentions;
We are deceived by them.
Intentions are killers;
I will put an end to them. {3.28}
“Enough of perception;
We are deceived by it.
Perception is a killer;
I will put an end to it. {3.29} {K65}
“Enough of saṃsāra;
We are deceived by it.
Saṃsāra is a killer;
I will put an end to it. {3.30}
“The mantra is:
āmava āmava āmava āmava āraja ranajaha śamyatha śamyatha śamyatha gagana­vama svāhā!”
The great Maudgalyāyana sang these stanzas and recited the words of the mantra to the sons of Māra while bounding along with them. Subsequently, the fifty māra youths, supremely thrilled and kindly disposed, said:
“O son of the lord of sages, endowed with magical power and protected by the noble path!
You are the lamp of Dharma who shows how to pacify the evils of saṃsāra.
We have now renounced evil and developed respect and devotion.
Today we take refuge in the Buddha, the supreme Dharma, and the Saṅgha.” {3.31}
The fifty māra youths bowed their heads to the feet of Venerable Maudgalyāyana and sat down in front of him, in the middle of the street, to hear the Dharma.
Around the same time, Venerable Pūrṇa, the son of Maitrāyaṇī, entered the city through the northern gate to beg alms. {K66} As before, fifty māra youths sang in unison with him: {TK78}
“Enough of sensory contact;
We are deceived by it.
Sensory contact is a killer;
I will put an end to it. {3.32}
“Enough of the controlling forces;
We are deceived by them.
Controlling forces are killers;
I will put an end to them. {3.33}
“Enough of saṃsāra;
We are deceived by it.
Saṃsāra is a killer;
I will put an end to it. {3.34}
“Enough of all becoming;
We are deceived by it.
Becoming is a killer;
I will put an end to it. {3.35}
“Enough of delight in sense pleasure;
We are deceived by it. 
Delight in sense pleasure is a slaughterhouse;
I will put an end to it. {TK79}
“Life passes quickly, my friends;
Fast flows the water.
A naive person doesn’t know this—
Such a fool gets infatuated with form. {3.36}
“Likewise, as before, he gets infatuated with sound, {3.37}
He gets infatuated with odor, {3.38}
He gets infatuated with taste, {3.39}
And he gets infatuated with touch. {3.40} {K67}
“Life passes quickly, my friends;
Fast flows the water.
A naive person doesn’t see this—
Such a fool gets infatuated with phenomena. {3.41}
“Likewise, as before, he gets infatuated with the aggregates, {3.42}
He gets infatuated with the psycho-physical elements, {3.43}
He gets infatuated with sensual enjoyments, {3.44}
He gets infatuated with comforts, {3.45}
He gets infatuated with caste, {3.46}
And he gets infatuated with sex. {3.47} {TK80}
“Life passes quickly, my friends;
Fast flows the water.
A naive person doesn’t know this—
Such a fool gets infatuated with everything. {3.48}
“The mantra is:
khargava khargava khargava mujñini āvarta vivarta khavarta bramārtha jyotivarta svāhā!”
Venerable Pūrṇa sang these stanzas and recited the words of the mantra to the sons of Māra while bounding along with them. Subsequently, the fifty māra youths, supremely thrilled  and kindly disposed, said:
“You have shown us the path of calming the mind.
The elements are illusory like a mirage or a reflected image.
This world of beings is produced by concepts.
We go for refuge to the Three Jewels, who are ready to answer our prayers.” {3.49} {K68}
All fifty of the māra youths bowed their heads to the feet of Venerable Pūrṇa and sat down in front of him, in the middle of the street, to hear the Dharma.
Around the same time, Venerable Subhūti entered the great city of Rājagṛha through the western gate {TK81} to beg alms. There, at the gate to the city, fifty māra youths, endowed with supreme youthful beauty, attired to resemble sons of distinguished personages, gallivanted about, dancing and singing. They seized Venerable Subhūti by both hands and, prancing along the street, urged him, “Dance, monk! Sing, monk!” 
Subhūti replied, “Listen, friends, as I sing you a song that you have not heard before.” 
Then all of them fell silent. Moving along with them, Venerable Subhūti sang the following:
“All things are impermanent; they are like illusions or bubbles on water.
All conditioned things are impermanent and by nature unstable.
Just as a mirage disappears as soon as it is seen, so, too, is there no permanence in them.
An intelligent person knows that all phenomena are easily destroyed. {3.50} {K69}
“All sensory contact brings suffering, as sensation has no essence.
All naive people get stuck right there, afflicted by painful phenomena.
There is no friend who would liberate one from all suffering
Like the faith that leads to awakening and the practice of meditation. {3.51} {TK82}
“All phenomena have one trait in common—they are good once conceptions are abandoned.
All conduct has no self and is insubstantial.
There is no living entity, vital principle, person, or agent.
You should reject the deceptions of Māra and incline your mind toward awakening. {3.52}
“Consciousness operates within the sense faculties like lightning in the sky.
All sensory contact, sensation, and mental activity are devoid of self.
Everything, when examined appropriately, is insubstantial. 
Naive people, stupefied, function like automatons. {3.53}
“ If the aggregates are comprehended to the core, no agent can be found.
Ultimately, everything is peaceful, empty, and free from extremes. {K70}
This is called the sphere of nondelusion and constitutes the path to awakening.
To attain awakening, you must follow the guide and protector.” {3.54}
“The mantra is:
sumunde vimunde munda jahi sili sili sili avasili tathātva­sili bhūta­koṭi­sili svāhā!”
Venerable Subhūti sang these stanzas and recited the words of the mantra to the sons of Māra while bounding along with them. {TK83} Subsequently, the fifty māra youths, supremely thrilled and kindly disposed, said:
“Not having heard these teachings before, we were under the influence of bad friends.
Whatever bad actions we have thus committed through delusion and ignorance, {3.55}
We now confess before you, O son of the victorious ones!
We make a solemn vow to attain buddhahood for the benefit of the world.” {3.56}
All fifty of the māra youths bowed their heads to the feet of Venerable Subhūti and sat down in front of him, in the middle of the street, to hear the Dharma. At the same time, through the power of the Buddha, the street appeared stretched to a radius of one hundred leagues. In the middle were seated Elder Śāriputra, {K71} the great Maudgalyāyana, Pūrṇa, and Subhūti, facing north, west, south, and east respectively and positioned at a distance of half a league from one another. In the center of the area between these great four hearers a lotus appeared—fifty cubits in diameter, with a golden stalk, petals of blue beryl, stamens of śrīgarbha, and a pericarp of pearl. {TK84}
From this lotus, which appeared to tower above the street to three times the height of a man, great light streamed forth, visible as far as the gods’ realm of the Four Great Kings,  to whom the lotus appeared to be fifty “celestial leagues” tall. In the realm of the Thirty-Three Gods, it appeared to be one hundred leagues tall. It could be seen as far as the Akaniṣṭha realm, where it appeared to be half a league tall. From the petals of this lotus emanated various stanzas with words rich in meaning. All beings on this earth heard the following stanzas: {K72}
“A unique, faultless man has arisen in this buddha field.
By him alone Māra and his forces—soldiers and mounts—were defeated. {3.57}
“Through the unique courage of the Buddha, the wheel of the Dharma was turned.
He alone has come, without a doubt, in order to benefit the world. {3.58}
“In this world, the two most disciplined men, proficient in moral precepts, are Upatiṣya and Kaulita.
They are knowledgeable and proficient in many treatises, and their purpose is the Dharma and liberation.
The great learned sage, skilled in the affairs that benefit the entire world, teaches the sacred Dharma.
This best of teachers, revered by the whole world, is coming today. {3.59} {TK85}
“This teacher who demonstrates the knowledge of the three times, king of all monks, promoter of the three types of instructions,
Protector of human and divine beings, knower of the infinite significance of the Dharma,
Expert in what helps and benefits the world, great lamp of wisdom, 
Speaker of truth who is free from the three stains, will teach everything today. {3.60}
“He exerted himself for the sake of all people, and his mind never growing weary,
Thus liberating all beings, afflicted as they are by suffering.
To those whose eyes are veiled by ignorance
He gives, accordingly, the eye of the sacred Dharma. {3.61} {K73}
“As his entire congregation has gathered together here,
This leonine speaker who reveals the absolute truth,
Supremely beautiful, endowed with the ten strengths,
Knower of what is and is not supreme, will arrive here before long. {3.62}
“Seeing that beings are immersed in a great ocean of suffering,
He will come to beat the drum of the Dharma.
His six senses are completely under control,
And his six knowledges follow from the six superknowledges. {3.63}
“This leonine preacher, endowed with the six seeds,
Will come here to give the six supreme, essential teachings. {TK86}
He defeats those who live in the city of the six sense faculties 
And is the lord of guides recalling the six supreme goals.” {3.64}
The following stanzas, also emanating from the lotus, could be heard as far as the realms of the six classes of the gods of desire.
“You now indulge in every possible pleasure
With careless minds, obscured by craving and self-aggrandizement.
You are always beguiled and intoxicated by the drink of pleasure.
Because of your heedlessness, you do not worship the Well-Gone One. {3.65} {K74}
“Sensual enjoyments are ephemeral like reflections of the moon in water.
The noose of saṃsāra, binding all beings, is extremely strong.
Those not freed from it, distracted by pleasures,
Will never reach nirvāṇa. {3.66}
“Always distracted, you do not practice mental tranquility
And do not see what you did in the past as virtuous or unvirtuous.
You will be seized with the fear of aging, disease, and death,
And someday will have to descend to the lower realms. {3.67}
“You should practice generosity, self-control, restraint, and nondistraction
And guard your previously accumulated merit.
You should give up impure sensual desires, which are endless,
And instead approach the Well-Gone One for refuge. {3.68}
“You should go to him and listen to his teaching,
Which is eloquent, rich in meaning,
And the cause of knowledge, liberation, and peace.
There is great value in listening to him who possesses the sacred Dharma. {3.69} {TK87}
The following stanzas, also emanating from the lotus, could be heard as far as the sixteen desire god realms. {K75}
“You should cultivate the Dharma assiduously
And delight in one-pointed contemplation, eliminating the afflictions.
Undistracted in mind and longing for liberation,
You will find an intelligence that relinquishes hatred. {3.70}
“You should cultivate the supreme acceptance,
The elucidation of the signs of the thirteen aspects.
Only through acceptance will you swiftly
Obtain ultimate liberation, free from disease and old age. {3.71}
“For those who put their faith in a multitude of forms and ideas
And see things as lasting, stable, and truly existent,
There will be no severance of the stream of rebirths.
They are destined for the lower realms. {3.72}
“But those who have ascertained the three realms to be selfless,
Insubstantial, non-independent, and inactive 
And who cultivate the acceptance of phenomena concurring with reality
Will all be liberated from the course of their rebirths. {3.73}
“There will be no death, aging, sickness,
Unhappy rebirth, or meeting with anything unpleasant {K76}
For those who meditate on all the phenomena in this world
As being equal to the sky, free from arising and destruction. {3.74}
“This path is infinitely pure and is sublime. {TK88}
Those whose minds are not caught up in the senses
Will defeat the four types of māras,
Just as did the lion of the Śākyas. {3.75}
“This supreme path is taught
For those who cultivate the single principle
That relinquishes sheer absence and all signs,
And for those who train in behavior in order to abandon duality. {3.76}
“Those who meditate on all phenomena in this world as empty,
Being without agent and without action,
Will directly experience the awakening of the sky-like nature,
Unequaled and devoid of expectation.” {3.77}
While these expressions of the Dharma, pregnant with meaning, were issuing forth from the lotus, the human and nonhuman beings present in this world sphere gathered together in the middle of the street and took their seats around the lotus. They included many beings up to the countless Akaniṣṭha gods, who descended from their realm in infinite numbers and took their seats around the lotus to hear the Dharma. 
The same stanzas were overheard by Māra, the evil one. Looking around, he saw, in the middle of the street in the great city of Rājagṛha, the lotus from which these stanzas were issuing {K77} and, seated around the lotus to hear the Dharma, infinite hundreds of thousands of millions of people. He then looked up and saw the same lotus in every abode of the gods throughout the six realms of desire. Those lotuses too were surrounded by infinite numbers of hundreds of thousands of millions of gods, seated in order to hear the Dharma. {TK89}
Consequently, Māra, the evil one, became even more frustrated, upset, and dejected. Covered in goosebumps and sweat, shivering, he flew up into the sky and, in a loud voice, angrily addressed the other māras:
“Listen to my out-of-character speech attentively!
I have no control over my dominion anymore, and no power in this world.
The power of this sage and his immaculate qualities
Spread throughout this world, confirming beings in their allegiance to him. {3.78}
“And furthermore, a lotus has sprung up to delight humans and gods.
All the good people have come to it, well disciplined
And eager to savor the fine teachings of the Well-Gone One.
Full of extraordinary qualities, they follow the path of calming the mind. {3.79} {K78}
“The magical illusion unleashed by this monk fools this entire threefold universe.
The multitudes of humans and gods, fully attentive, stand around the lotus.
Quickly cast down a rain of rocks along with terrifying cries!
He will perish today, if attacked by the fierce soldiers of Māra.” {3.80}
Another māra said to the evil one:
“Listen to this beneficial advice from us. Do you really understand what your duty is
If, even though you’ve seen the ruin of your army, you still don’t want to make peace?
It is we who are in error, considering that the splendorous body of the Well-Gone One is a receptacle of good fortune,
And that apart from the Buddha—a guide in truth—there is no other refuge in this world so exalted.” {3.81}
Then another māra, lamenting loudly, his words full of utmost indignation, said this to Māra, the evil one:
“You have lost your way and are on a lowly course!
Don’t you know that we have no such strength or might?
Have you no shame and no compunction, {TK90}
That you are competing against the Guide? {3.82}
“While our force has been ruined,
All the world’s inhabitants, through the power of the Buddha,
Have been drawn near the lotus,
Their pure bodies nourished by hearing the Dharma. {3.83}
“We, on the other hand, have become repulsive;
Our bodies stink and our strength and valor are gone. {K79}
We should take refuge with the lord of sages,
So that we don’t perish immediately.” {3.84}
Other māras said with folded hands:
“You, O evil one, have given up right conduct and delight in evil acts,
But the Buddha is the protector skilled in bringing benefit to beings, the best among the good.
We should promptly go to the city of Rājagṛha, putting on a pleasant and peaceful appearance.
Let us go for the refuge that is revered by the threefold universe—a universal medicine for all beings!” {3.85}
There was a māra there in the sky called Ghoṣavati. He proposed in a loud voice:
“All of you together, please listen to my words in a spirit of devotion and friendliness.
Let us renounce our wrong views, bow down to him, and likewise pay homage with speech and mind.
Having renounced anger, may we be thrilled  by the teachings of the Sage, with feelings of devotion and faith welling up in us.
Let us go to the Buddha in person to seek the refuge so difficult to obtain; let us worship him today with devotion.” {3.86}
At this moment all the māras descended from the sky and constructed gates to the city of Rājagṛha from the seven gems. Some, taking on the appearance of universal monarchs, {TK91} stood in front of the Blessed One, making every effort to worship him. Some took on the appearance of Brahmā, some of Vaśavartin, some of Maheśvara, some of Nārāyaṇa, some of a Tuṣita god, {K80} some of Yāma, some of Śakra, and some of a god from the realm of the Thirty-Three. Some took on the form of Kumāra, Vaiśravaṇa, Virūḍhaka, Virūpākṣa, or Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and some, the form of the mundane Four Great Kings. Some took on the appearance of Sūrya, Candra, or Tāraka; some, the appearance of an asura, garuḍa, kinnara, or mahoraga; and some, the appearance of jewel mountains, golden ornaments, various gems, or jeweled trees. Some took on the appearance of a kṣatriya; some, the appearance of members of religions other than Buddhism; some, the appearance of the precious wheel, the precious jewel, the elephant Airāvaṇa, Bālāha the king of steeds, or the precious consort; and some, the appearance of a respected merchant or a royal minister. Magically transformed into these forms, they stood in front of the Blessed One in order to worship him. 
Some of them, who were blue with a blue complexion, magically adorned their bodies with white ornaments. In order to worship the Blessed One they floated in the sky at the height of a palm tree,  holding red parasols, banners, flags, and strings of pearls. Some were dazzling white with a white complexion and adorned with bright red ornaments; they floated in the sky holding yellow parasols, {TK92} banners, flags, and strings of pearls. {K81} Some were bright red with a red complexion and adorned with ornaments of a golden color. They floated aloft, holding blue parasols, banners, and flags. Some were red with a red complexion and rained down white pearls. Some were white with a white complexion and rained down red pearls. Some, magically appearing as celestial ṛṣis, rained flowers from the sky in great profusion. Some, appearing as the Blessed One’s hearers, rained divine fragrances of various kinds from the sky. Some, appearing as gandharvas, strummed various divine instruments. Some, appearing as celestial nymphs, sprinkled the ground with perfumed water from vessels made of various gems. Some, of obsidian-black complexion, burned incense of various fragrances. Some, appearing as gods, danced and sang. Some, of varying complexion, praised the Blessed One with their folded hands directed toward him. Some māras, and even their retinues, turned to face the direction where the Blessed One resided and, holding various jewels, offered them to him in worship. Some, having placed themselves by the upper windows of houses and buildings along the street or upon gateways, tall buildings, houses at crossroads of three or four roads, gates, trees, or palaces, were sitting there for the purpose of worshiping the Blessed One.
When Māra, the evil one, saw all those māras with their retinues going for refuge in the monk Gautama, he became even more rattled, frightened, and confused. Wailing aloud, he said: {K82}
“I have no friends anymore
And have today been deprived of all my glory. {TK93}
Separated now from my dominion,
I will make my final effort. {3.87}
“I will cut down at its root
the lotus where all the beings went.
After cutting it, they will all be flummoxed—
this will be my last stand.” {3.88}
Having thus made up his mind, Māra, the evil one, descended from the sky, fast as wind, to the street where the lotus was, and, having crept up to its stalk, tried to uproot it but could not even touch it. He tried to cut the petals but could not even see them. He also tried to smash the pericarp with his fist but could not even grasp it. Just as lightning, or a shadow, can be seen but not grasped, in the same way he could see the lotus but not grasp it.
When he thus saw the lotus without being able to touch it or seize it, he tried to let loose a most horrific deafening cry in order to frighten the entire congregation, but this too he was unable to do. He tried further, with great vehemence and force, to strike the great earth with both his hands to make it shake, but was unable, in this case too, to touch it or to seize it. Just as someone wanting to hit the sky cannot reach it, in the same way Māra, the evil one, saw the earth but could not touch it or seize it.
He then thought, “If I could only punch the beings assembled here, or distract their minds.” But while he could see these beings, {TK94} he was unable to touch or seize even one of them. Then Māra, the evil one, wept bitterly. Through the power of the Buddha, his entire body shook like a tree. {K83} With a tear-streaked face he looked in the four directions and lamented:
“This miraculous feat, performed by this monk today, will attract the entire world to him.
Because of my earlier delusion, I suddenly became dispossessed,
And I am now separated from my dominion, my merit, and my strength.
My life is finished. Banished, I will promptly go to my abode, while I am still alive.” {3.89}
But even though he tried to go home, he could not. Frightened still more, he could only weep. He thought, “I am deprived of my magical power completely. Woe is me! May I not fall under the control of the monk Gautama! And may I now disappear, so that I do not die in front of him, my enemy.  As no being should see me die in his buddha field, may I die as soon as I am out of the Sahā world buddha field.”
But still, he was unable to disappear from sight or flee in any direction, cardinal or intermediate. Instead, he perceived himself, still at the same location, tied around the neck with a fivefold noose, and became even more upset and frightened. Howling in a raucous voice, he lamented, “Woe is me! I will never again see my dear sons or kinsmen.”
Then the māra by the name Ghoṣavati, seated in the manner of a universal monarch, asked Māra, the evil one: {K84}
“Sir, why are you today, in your anguish, loudly lamenting and crying?
Discarding fear, you should promptly go to the exalted sage, the best in the entire world, for refuge.
He is the protector, refuge, and defender of the world, who removes the three sufferings.
Surely, if you devote yourself to him, you will obtain peace and happiness.” {3.90}
Māra, the evil one, then thought, “If I approach the monk Gautama, with pleasing words, to take refuge, I would then be freed from these fetters.” {TK95}
Bowing with folded hands toward the Blessed One, he said, “Homage to you, the most eminent person and the ultimate deliverer from birth, aging, disease, and death! I herewith go to the Blessed Buddha to take refuge.” 
Then he continued:
“Release me from this unbearable, terrifying noose, O sage and protector!
Today and henceforth, I take refuge with the Well-Gone One, the greatest and most important being.
Having committed grave offenses against you when I was angry and blinded by my ignorance,
I confess all of them before you, taking you as my witness.” {3.91}
When Māra, the evil one, thus took refuge in the Blessed Buddha, saying pleasant words, he had the sense that he was released. But when he had the thought to escape from the assembly, he had the sense that his neck was once again bound by a fivefold noose. {K85} When he was again unable to go anywhere and thought, once again, of seeking refuge and protection from the Blessed One, he had the sense that he was released. Staying right in that spot, he had the sense of being bound and released seven times over.
This concludes the chapter on the taming of Māra, the third in the “Ratnaketu Sūtra” from the Great Collection. {K86} {TK96}
Chapter 4
When the four great hearers were, as described before, in the great city of Rājagṛha collecting alms, they were rudely accosted by the māra youths who urged them, “Dance, monk! Sing, monk!” When, subsequently, the great hearers, running along the street, sang their verses with lyrics that describe the path to nirvāṇa, this great earth trembled. At that moment many hundreds of thousands of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas, inspired with faith in the Blessed One’s instructions, said this, their faces awash with tears:
“Though the excellent Dharma-leader abides in the state without sorrow,
The fine teachings of the victorious ones are in desperate straits.
If beings now see this nonsense directed at his disciples,
How will they come to have faith?” {4.1}
Then, many hundreds of thousands of millions of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, and rākṣasas, their faces bathed in tears, approached the Blessed One. Standing before him, they said:
“Please consider, O Blessed One,
The predicament of your instructions at this moment. {TK97}
Do not neglect, O omniscient one,
The preservation of the practice thereof.” {4.2} {K87}
The Blessed One replied:
“If so, I will go there myself,
And, having defeated Māra and his mounted forces,
I will put the whole of humanity
On the road to the city of nirvāṇa.” {4.3}
All those gathered there pleaded with one voice, “Do not go, O Blessed One!  Have you not said before that the domains of the blessed buddhas, the māras, and the nāgas, and of the acts they commit, are inconceivable? Among all these domains, that of the buddhas is preeminent. The Blessed One can, while sitting right on his seat, defeat tens of millions of māras, explain tens of millions of Dharma treatises, dry up the ocean of afflictions, tear up the net of wrong views, and submerge tens of millions of beings in the ocean of wisdom. The time is not right for the Blessed One to go now.”
The Blessed One replied, “Even if all beings, however many there are in the inhabited realms, were to become māras, and if all the particles of dust, however many there are on earth, were individually mobilized by his power to advance toward me in order to take my life, they would not be able to harm even a single hair on my body. Whereas I, sitting on this very seat, would be able to defeat tens of millions of billions of māras, except for Māra himself along with his personal retinue. 
“I will go back so that the entire great city of Rājagṛha becomes adorned by the māras offering worship to me {TK98} with marvelous displays magically created by the power of Māra. I will use this event to inspire them with compassion, so that these māras, when supreme appreciation and faith are born in them, will create the roots of virtue necessary to realize unsurpassed and perfect awakening.” {K88}
When the Blessed One was thus about to get up from his seat, Prabhāvaśobhanā, the guardian deity of Veṇuvana, stood in front of him with a tearful face and insisted:
“This is not the right time, O Blessed One, to enter
The city that is presently crawling with māras.
Each one of them is exceedingly fierce
And surrounded by ten million others, O leonine teacher! {4.4}
“Wild with anger,  they brandish sharp weapons.
They bide their time, their disturbed minds bent on killing you.
You should not enter the city under any circumstances, O lord,
Lest you meet your own destruction, O kinsman of the world!” {4.5}
When the Blessed One did, nevertheless, get up from his seat, the goddess of the monastery, Dyutimati, bowed her head to his feet and said:
“Five thousand evil ones
Are waiting with their weapons.
These cruel māras are expecting you;
You should not go today, O great sage!” {4.6}
When the Blessed One did, nevertheless, walk out of the monastery, {TK99} the medicine goddess, Siddhimati, bowed her head to his feet and said:
“If the lamp of the world perishes,
Alas, the path will be lost,
The Dharma methods will be destroyed,
And the ship of Dharma will sink. {4.7}
“The exalted essence of the Dharma is waning in the entire world,
Which is overflowing with the fierce and vile afflictions.
I have some power over the earth and the power {K89}
To prevent the destruction of the Well-Gone One, the best of sages. {4.8}
“There are many violent beings in this place intent on killing you.
Dedicated to evil ways, they are waiting with their sharp axes and swords.
Please heed my plea, O Well-Gone One, on how to protect the world.
Do not enter the city, O mountain with the ten strengths who has accomplished his journey!” {4.9}
But the Blessed One set forth from the monastery courtyard. The tree goddess Dyutindharā, wailing most piteously, bowed her head to his feet and pleaded:
“Lord! The moment that you—the sage who fulfills all wishes and accomplishes all aims—
Have perished, the entire threefold universe will be deprived of its eyesight.
Warriors with snake-like tongues and flaming mouths, armed with sharp swords and arrows, 
Roam the sky above, intent on killing you. Do not go there now!” {4.10} {TK100}
When the Blessed One approached the covered gate passage, the goddess thereof, Jyotivaruṇā by name, wailing in a loud voice, bowed her head to his feet and said:
“In that fine city, there are twenty thousand  so-called brahmins.
They are looking for you, armed with flaming swords, knives, and arrows, and devoid of mercy.
Twenty thousand of them, pitiless and cruel even to one another,
Are waiting not far from here to kill you. Please, do not go, O fair-faced one!” {4.11}
When the Blessed One nevertheless entered the gate passage, the protector goddess of the city of Rājagṛha, Tamālasārā by name, {K90} crying out from the sky in a loud voice, hastily approached him, bowed her head to his feet, and warned:
“What is more, O Blessed One, the road from here is overrun with lions, camels, and rutting elephants.
The māras have set up ambushes to endanger the monks.
Also, the followers of other religions are poised to eliminate you, the Teacher, from this earth.
Out of compassion for the gods and the nāgas, please don’t go, O lighted lamp with a thunderous voice! {4.12}
“O blessed tamer of māras! The lords of humans, gods, serpentine beings, and kinnaras, 
Disturbed by the possible destruction of your doctrine, have joined together.
Frightened, they chase the māras,
And also the magically created figures with grotesquely disfigured faces. {4.13}
“Seeing the impending demise of the sacred Dharma, the calamities befalling the world, {TK101}
The sky with the light of the constellations all gone, and the unsteadiness of the sun and the moon,
Virtuous people cannot bear it; beating their heads,
Dreading that the Well-Gone One may perish, they can only exclaim, ‘Alas! Woe is us!’ {4.14}
“The sun of the doctrine is setting.
The meteor of the Dharma is fading out.
Death is trampling down upon the perfect Buddha. 
The water of the Dharma is drying up. {4.15}
“When the ruin of the followers 
Of the sacred Dharma has approached,
There will be, in this world, 
A proliferation of nonvirtuous māras.” {4.16} {K91}
Seeing that the Blessed One would not turn back, the goddess shed even more tears and begged:
“Please have regard, O sage, for this entire world!
Do not go, O best of speakers, to your destruction today!
If you meet your doom in my city,
I would be forever blamed by the threefold universe. {4.17}
“Heed my plea, O Guide, the best of beings!
Do not go to destruction in my city today,
But, out of compassion for beings, wait here,
Liberating them from the fear and  pain of rebirth! {4.18}
“Remember your former pledge, O Thus-Gone One—
‘When I attain the ultimate state, may I become a savior
Of the many beings afflicted by great suffering!’
Give comfort, O supreme being, to all those who draw breath. {4.19}
“Remain, O best of embodied beings, for many millions of eons! {TK102}
Alas! The naive are caught up in sense objects.
To give them peace, please show them the Dharma path leading to
The realization that the sense bases and faculties are empty by nature!” {4.20}
But the Blessed One advanced farther along the gate passage. The earth goddess, Dṛḍhā, together with ten thousand other deities each endowed with great vigor, her face bathed in tears and hair disheveled, stood before the Blessed One with folded hands {K92} and pleaded:
“Remember the gifts that you made in the past—
Your blood that would fill the four oceans;
Your head and bones, enough to form the Cakravāḍa range;
Your eyes, numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā; {4.21}
“Your various jewels, given away in the past;
And your sons, daughters, elephants, horses,
Houses, clothes, beds, food, drink,
And medicine needed by the sick. {4.22}
“You offered supreme worship to the self-arisen ones,
Carefully guarded your discipline,
Always applied yourself to forbearance and study,
And honored your mother and father. {4.23}
“You practiced endless difficult austerities
And freed beings from their many afflictions.
In the past, at the very start, you made the following vow:
‘May I become a buddha who shows the absolute truth {4.24}
“ ‘And saves humanity from the great ocean of suffering! {TK103}
May I teach the Dharma to the world!
May I uproot craving and the great fears!
May I dispel all suffering! {4.25}
“ ‘May I lead multitudes of beings to the city of fearlessness
By establishing them on the path to supreme awakening! {K93}
May I liberate those afflicted with much suffering
And fulfill all the needs of beings!’ {4.26}
“Forgive those, O lord, who have strayed from the path
And commit evil in this world, ruining their learning and discipline.
Save them! Remember your vow!
Continue to teach the Dharma for many millions of eons! {4.27}
“Ferry the beings, O lord, across the sea of suffering!
Wash them with the water possessed of the eight qualities!
There is no being in the threefold universe
Who could be as eminent as you, O lord. {4.28}
“Liberated yourself, may you liberate the world as well!
Save the world from the ocean of the three realms,
For you are a buddha, and the sole kinsman of the world.
Remain forever and share the Dharma with others.” {4.29}
The Blessed One, however, proceeded farther along the gate passage. At that moment many hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and rākṣasas, their faces bathed in tears, flew through the sky, imploring him:
“First, during the time of peace, we saw well-gone ones
Who trained their students well,
Instructing them in the Dharma in full
Without being blocked in the manner it is happening now. {4.30} {K94}
“This teacher, one of great intelligence, {TK104}
Has attained the self-arisen state during the degenerate period.
He, the lord of sages, has taught the Dharma in this world,
Which is obscured by the afflictions, for the sake of bringing beings to maturity. {4.31}
“While this leonine speaker remains here,
One billion evil ones
Are bringing ruin upon the Dharma.
Do not enter the city today, O valiant Buddha!” {4.32}
Another goddess warned:
“The former victors, engaged for the sake of the world’s welfare,
Turned the wheel of the Dharma in just one place.
This one, however, preaches wherever he travels.
There is a risk that calamity will befall him in such places!” {4.33}
Another goddess said:
“This leader, out of compassion, has wandered around 
And has benefited beings in great measure.
My only concern, however, is that today
He might perish in this city.” {4.34}
Under these circumstances, many hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas descended from the sky above with forlorn expressions on their tear-soaked faces. Arraying themselves before the Blessed One, they acted in many different, self-harming ways.
Some pulled out their hair. Some cast off their adornments. Some {K95} threw away their parasols, banners, and flags. Some threw themselves on the ground. Some took hold of the Blessed One’s feet. Some wailed most piteously. Some beat their breasts {TK105} with their hands. Some, standing at the Blessed One’s feet, spun in circles like the madgu bird. Some, standing in front of the Blessed One with folded hands, bowed to him and recited praises.  And some showered upon him flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, scented oils, clothes, adornments, golden thread, strings of pearls, and fine cloth. Some others, numbering tens of millions, chanted the following in a single loud voice:
“You have practiced many austerities
For the great benefit of the world.
Now that your time here is limited, 
Please be equanimous. Stay! Don’t leave! {4.35}
“Your buddha activity, O faultless one, has been accomplished only in part.
Only a few gods and humans have been called to witness you.
You should remain, teaching the Dharma for a long time to come,
Thus delivering beings from the ocean of the threefold existence. {4.36}
“There are many beings practicing good conduct.
With their good seeds ripening, they have become vessels for the elixir of the Dharma.
You should feel compassion for them and teach them the meaning.
You should deliver the pitiful world from the river of suffering. {4.37}
“You should show the right path
To those who have lost their way in the wilderness of saṃsāra
And have strayed into the thick forest of various destinies. {K96}
You should deliver them with words of the supreme noble Dharma. {4.38} {TK106}
“Your most marvelous and wonderful act of compassion
Was the turning of the wheel of the sublime Dharma.
Please remain for a long time, O most intelligent one!
Let humankind not be deprived of a protector!” {4.39}
Another goddess said:
“Should the Guide perish,
The entire world will be rendered blind.
The eightfold path—the cause of the threefold liberation—
Will not exist in this world in any way whatsoever. {4.40}
“We have carefully planted virtuous seeds 
Sprung from body, speech, and mind,
And are thus now surrounded by every type of comfort.
May this spring of merit not be lost!” {4.41}
Now many hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of gods from the Pure Abode gathered together and said:
“Do not fret! The Sage, one of vast intellect, 
Will not come to grief of any kind,
Even though tens of millions of māras have arrived on earth.
This virtue is clearly evident to us. {4.42}
“The terrifying army of Māra has battalions stretching all around for thirty-six leagues, primed to move swiftly and with devastating force,
Armed with barbed missiles, scimitars, and enormous swords, and making a lot of raucous sounds. {TK107}
Having now advanced as far as the seat of awakening, it has now approached its own demise.
Today it will instantly become terrified of Siddhartha; how then could it create obstacles for the one whose fame has spread far and wide?” {4.43} {K97}
Another goddess said in tears:
“This army consisted in the past of a single māra and wasn’t very strong.
But now, tens of thousands of millions of māras strong, it is very powerful. {4.44}
I fear that the leader of the world will meet his doom,
And that after his demise, this world will spiral into darkness.” {4.45}
 Then Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors clasped the feet of the Blessed One and pleaded:
“Remain here, O holy one! Please follow the advice, O champion of compassion,
Of the two of us, inferior to you in intelligence.
Many tens of millions of gods are afflicted with profound anguish.
Please besprinkle them now with the nectar of Dharma!” {4.46}
The Blessed One then looked at the entire congregation, eyes wide with loving kindness, and uttered the following words to comfort them, his voice as sweet as Brahmā’s:
“Don’t fret! You must not be afraid now!
Not even all the māras together, riding upon their mounts,
The whole lot of them, would be able to trouble
A single hair of mine, let alone my whole body. {4.47}
“I will console the entire world today
And will always teach the Dharma on this earth. {TK108}
To those who have lost their way,
I will duly divulge it with lucid instructions. {4.48} {K98}
“In the past I performed many difficult austerities
And distributed food and drink in abundance,
As well as many houses and much medicine.
Who would be able to harm me today? {4.49}
“I gave away horses, chariots, and elephants;
So also ornaments and adornments, 
Female and male servants, cities and kingdoms.
Who would be able to harm me today? {4.50}
“For the benefit of beings I gave away
My wives, sons, daughters, and other family members,
As well as the royal power desired on earth and my royal lineage.
How then could my body be destroyed today? {4.51}
“I gave my head, both my eyes, ears, nose, 
Hands and feet, flesh, skin, and blood.
I even gave my own life for the embodied beings in this world.
Who, then, would be able to hurt me? {4.52}
“With my own hands, I presented huge offerings to many
Tens of millions of buddhas, worshiping them with devotion.
I always delighted in practicing discipline, study, and acceptance.
Who, then, would be able to injure me today? {4.53}
“I formerly practiced difficult austerities
With my mind completely focused in absorption.
If there was no anger in my mind even when my body was being butchered, {TK109}
Who would be able to hurt me today? {4.54} {K99}
“With my afflictions pacified, I am a fully self-controlled buddha
With my mind full of love for all beings.
I have no envy, harshness, or anger.
No one will be able to stand in my way today. {4.55}
“I have gained victory over the entire army of Māra
And defeated many tens of millions of māras. 
I will definitely liberate you from saṃsāra,
So don’t be afraid. Why would I not enter the city? {4.56}
“Any buddhas dwelling, for the sake of beings,
In the ten directions,
I will engage them here,
Along with the bodhisattvas with great magical powers. {4.57}
“I will completely fill all the buddha fields.
There, I will institute merit and wisdom.
And when those buddhas are properly abiding,
I will fulfill the intentions of the buddhas. {4.58}
On that occasion, infinite and innumerable hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, and human and nonhuman beings applauded the Blessed One by exclaiming, “Homage to the one endowed with infinite diligence who has the power to work miracles and wonders! Homage, homage to the Blessed Buddha who is thus endowed! {TK110} The world and its gods have been comforted by the Blessed One, and the followers of Māra defeated. The filth of the afflictions that bind beings to existence has been dispelled. {K100} The mountain of their arrogance has been split asunder. The tree of birth  has been cut down, the sun of death turned to powder, the darkness of ignorance dispelled, the followers of other religions brought to have faith, the four rivers dried up, the torch of the Dharma lit, and the path to awakening shown.
“Beings have been established in acceptance and gentleness, caused to playfully abide in the bliss of meditation, and made to realize the four truths of the noble ones. The world and its gods have been ferried across the ocean of births by the most compassionate, blessed teacher. Sentient beings have been transported to the city of fearlessness.”
Then the gods and humans worshiped the Blessed One with sundry flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ornaments, and adornments and swept the road for his sake. They covered it in celestial cloth, calico, and flowers, including celestial flowers such as mandārava and great mandārava, pāruṣaka and great pāruṣaka, mañjuṣaka and great mañjuṣaka, and roca and great roca, as well as blue, red, and white lotus flowers. In the places where the Blessed One would put his feet {TK111} on the road, they conjured up, on either side, trees made of the seven precious gems, and adorned them with celestial cloth, calico, and hand, ear, and head adornments. Between the trees, they conjured up celestial lotus ponds with cool and sweet water, completely limpid and free of turbidity. These were filled with water possessing eight qualities and adorned all around with the seven precious gems.
In the space above, they held up parasols made from the seven precious gems, banners, flags, golden thread, and strings of pearls. They sent showers of dust made of gold, silver, and beryl, and the powders of aloeswood, crape jasmine, white sandalwood, and benjamin, and the leaves of the tamāla tree. {K101} They sprinkled powdered gośīrṣa and uragasāra sandalwood upon the road. They also adorned the entire firmament with golden thread, strings of pearls,  and loose jewels and pearls, as well as various other ornaments. Outside the city the gods and humans decorated the road in order to worship the Blessed One, while inside, the māras and their retinues created beautiful magical displays in order to worship him.
At this time the Blessed One entered the absorption called becoming indestructible and, immersed in it, proceeded on his way down the road. {TK112} He advanced on the road assuming various physical forms and features with their corresponding modes of deportment. Those beings who were devoted to Brahmā and capable of being guided by him saw the Blessed One walking in the form of Brahmā. Those who were capable of being guided by Śakra, Nārāyaṇa, Maheśvara, the Four Great Kings, a universal monarch, the master of a castle, a great sage, a monk, a princely youth, a woman, a lion, an elephant, a nāga, or an asura saw the Blessed One in that respective form. Those who were devoted to and capable of being guided by rabbits saw the Blessed One with the form and features of a rabbit, advancing on the road in the manner of a rabbit. Those capable of being guided by buddhas saw the Blessed One with the form and features of a buddha, advancing on the road in the manner of a buddha. All these beings walked along close together with folded hands, one after the other, bowing and singing praises.
At that time, the sage Jyotīrasa, who lived next to the Himalayas, {K102} spurred on by Māra, arrived in the vicinity of the gates of the great city of Rājagṛha, along with his retinue of five hundred. When he saw the Blessed One proceeding down the road in the form, features, color, shape, deportment, and style of a sage, and the many billions of gods {TK113} diligently venerating him, he had the following thought:
“Truly, this man is a great sage with tremendous power. He is worthy of veneration and both gods and humans are venerating him. His entire body is ornamented with the marks of merit. I can see that he is a learned preceptor. I would like to check to see which of the two of us is elder and more learned. So, I will go before him and inquire about his caste, family lineage, dwelling place, and ascetic discipline.”
Then the sage Jyotīrasa gazed upon his retinue and announced:
“There is one who is educated, honest, disciplined, venerable, and worthy of veneration.
He possesses wisdom and the meaningful Dharma—this supreme sage fully knows the path of acceptance.
You all should join him, offering him respectful veneration,
And listen to the man of such qualities delivering his well-spoken doctrine that ends saṃsāra.” {4.59}
All the young brahmins in his retinue pledged with one voice that they would do as their preceptor had instructed. The sage Jyotīrasa and his retinue then went to the Blessed One. Standing before the Blessed One, they joined their palms and asked, “Who are you?”
The Blessed One answered, “I am a brahmin.”
“What is your family lineage?”
“I am of the Gautama family lineage.”
“What is your ascetic discipline?”
“My ascetic discipline is the threefold liberation.”
“What is your practice?”
“I practice suchness, the ultimate reality.”
“How long has it been since you went forth?”
“I have gone forth {TK114} since ignorance arose.”
“Great Sage, can you explain the Vedic teachings of astrology?”
The Blessed One responded, “When one is free from superimposition, everything is the same.  So from that perspective, what is the point of worldly knowledge?”
 “It delights the learned,” replied the sage.
“Where do the stars abide?” asked the Blessed One.
The sage answered, “There are said to be the twenty-eight constellations that are supported by, and follow, the sun and the moon. In relation to the measurement by fingers, there are thirty-eight. Using this measurement by fingers, there are twelve fingers lengthwise within the body where the stars abide. With one measure of a finger at the brain in the head and one measure of a finger at the soles of the feet, there are a total of fourteen such fingers within the body. What exists at those locations does not change into anything else. Thus, the way one is follows the star under which one is born. What else is there? Let me explain. Please listen, Great Sage!
“Those who have a mole on the right side of their face 
At the location of four fingers,
A black beard, and ruddy hue 
Are born under the constellation Kṛttikā. {4.60}
“They will have wealth and fame,
They will be learned, and their glory will spread.
These are the signs of those
Who are born under Kṛttikā. {4.61}
“Those who have a mole
At the location of four fingers
Are born under the constellation Rohiṇī. {TK115}
They will be knowledgeable and constantly delight in the Dharma. {4.62}
“Learned and with abundant wealth,
Beautiful in all respects,
Heroic and always victorious,
They will defeat all their enemies. {4.63}
“Whoever has a mark resembling fire 
At the location half a finger from the neck
Is born under the constellation Mṛgaśirā 
And will be heroic and wealthy. {4.64}
“Whoever has a mole on the left side,
At the location of half a finger,
Is born under the constellation Ārdrā
And will be angry and foolish, but wealthy. {4.65}
“Those who have moles in the left armpit
Are born under the constellation Punarvasū.
They will have wealth and be rich in grain,
Yet their mental resources will be limited. {4.66}
“Yet you, born under the constellation Puṣyā,
Have the finest marks.
On the palms of your hands there are wheels
That beautify you like the sun. {4.67}
“All the hair on your head
Twists upward to the right.
Your body is of equal proportions.
You, O leader, have tamed your afflictions. {4.68}
“With a mark at the heart center resembling fire, {TK116}
Those born under the constellation Āśleṣā will crave violence.
Their discipline will be corrupt, and they will trouble their companions.
They will delight in sexual misconduct. {4.69}
“Those who have a mole resembling a pea,
Whether down low, on the front, or on the back,
Are born under the constellation Maghā. 
They will be wealthy and disciplined religious people. {4.70}
“Those who have birthmarks
On both the left and right of the navel
Are born under the constellation Pūrvaphalgunī
And will be stingy and have a short life. {4.71}
“Those who have a mole
Four fingers below the navel
Are born under the constellation Uttaraphalgunī. 
Wealthy and disciplined, upon death they will go to the higher realms. {4.72}
“Those born under the constellation Hastā
Will have a red mole on the buttocks.
They will thieve, deceive, and defraud.
Their merit is trifling and their intelligence meager. {4.73}
“Those who have a mole on their penis
Are definitely
Born under the constellation Citrā.
Their preference will be for song and dance. {4.74}
“Those who have a yellow mole,
Either above or below the penis,
Are born under the constellation Svāti. {TK117}
They are not learned, but desirous and often angry. {4.75}
“Those who, at one finger of both thighs,
Have a red mole
Are perfect lords born under the constellation Viśākhā
And will be attended by men and women, {4.76}
“Learned and brave, defeating their enemies,
Always enjoying a pleasant life,
Modest, intelligent, and reliable.
Having died, they will be reborn in the higher realms. {4.77}
“Those who have a mole like a pea 
At one finger of both thighs
Practice discipline and are born under the constellation of Anurādhā.
They have both Dharma and enjoyments. {4.78}
“Those who have a mole underneath their thighs
Are born under the constellation Jyeṣṭhā.
They are ugly, short-lived, and corrupt in discipline.
They are neither ethical nor compassionate. {4.79}
“Those who have, on both knees,
Small birthmarks
Are charismatic people born under the constellation Mūlā.
They will swiftly destroy their own homes. {4.80}
“Those born under the constellation Pūrvāṣāḍhā
Have moles on their kneecaps.
They practice charity and desire the Dharma path.
At death, they go to the higher realms. {4.81}
“Those born under the constellation Uttarāṣāḍhā {TK118}
Have moles on their elbows.
In that regard, they are intelligent,
Wealthy, and loving toward others. {4.82}
“They who have moles on both elbows
Are born under the constellation Śravaṇā. 
They are always wealthy, healthy, and loving toward others. 
At death, they go to the higher realms. {4.83}
“Those who have black moles on their calves
Are born under the constellation Dhaniṣṭhā.
They will have little anger or desire.
They will have no wealth, but they will be wise. {4.84}
“Those who have black moles
At the finger measure on their calves
Are born under the constellation Śatabhiṣā. 
They are foolish and will end up drowning. {4.85}
“Those who have something like a scar at the finger below their calves
Are born under the constellation Pūrvabhadrapadā. 
They are foolish and prone to injure others,
Are destitute, and often steal. {4.86}
“Those who have moles throughout their finger measures
Are born under the constellation Uttarabhadrapadā.
They are generous, disciplined, mindful,
Knowledgeable, fearless, and compassionate. {4.87}
“Those who have tiny moles
On both their legs
Are born under the constellation Revatī.
They are ill-mannered and become barbers. {4.88} {TK119}
“Those who have black moles
On their thumb joints
Are always vital and healthy
And born under the constellation Aśvinī. {4.89}
“Those who have moles on the soles of their feet
Are born under the constellation Bharaṇī. 
They are loveless and have the character of killers and executioners.
When they die, they go to the hell realms. {4.90}
“Those who undertake particular types of conduct
Bear these astrological signs.
It is consciousness that leads beings
Around the universe.” {4.91}
The Blessed One then said:
“Childish beings whose experience is conceptual
Can be attached to anything.
They are deluded and spiritually immature.
They live in their heads and catch infectious diseases. {4.92}
“Dogs, snakes, turtles,
And various other kinds of animals,
And anyone born under the constellation Puṣyā,
Do not experience well being. {4.93}
“Just as you have acquired 
Absorption, magical powers, and freedom,
I myself am all-seeing,
So why don’t you ask me your questions?” {4.94}
The sage Jyotīrasa showered the Blessed One with flowers {TK120} and was deeply pleased. He then inquired:
“O sage in human form
Who is replete with the finest marks,
Given that I do not know your ancestry,
I would like to know if you are a god or a man. {4.95}
“When your speech and voice are heard,
They are like those of Mahābrahmā.
The actions you take and the manner in which you behave
Resemble the sages of yore. {4.96}
“Sage, how are you so excellent,
Such that I’ve never seen or heard of anyone like you before? 
Please tell me who your teacher was,
And what your ancestry is!” {4.97}
The Blessed One answered:
“I am not concerned with high or low.
Whoever is stuck with such designations
Binds themselves to all manner of suffering—
They are not fitting vessels for freedom. {4.98}
“My lineage is the six perfections.
With them I destroy brahmins with the six superknowledges,
Those who preach the six sources of joy,
And the six faculties. {4.99}
“I have the knowledge that understands the three phenomena.
My conduct is the threefold liberation.
I went forth at the moment
That I developed the mind of awakening. {4.100}
“I do not focus on any signs— {TK121}
Indeed I cultivate signlessness.
I am a perfect buddha, 
Teaching the absence of being, life principle, and self. {4.101}
“I have fully cultivated the emptiness
Of the three sensations and the three formations.
My wisdom has reached the far shore.
Nothing is communicated by my words. {4.102}
“Anyone who is unattached like space
And arouses the mind set upon awakening 
Will achieve the perfect strength of patience,
As well as wisdom. {4.103}
“Awakening is not difficult to find
For one who does not engage with phenomena,
Has no desire for karmic ripening,
And does not contradict suchness. {4.104}
“If one contemplates the ultimate reality
Without fixating on phenomena
Or adhering to high or low,
One will become a thus-gone one. {4.105}
“There are no characteristics or marks.
If one abandons such reference points,
And does not get involved with any phenomenon,
One will become a thus-gone one. {4.106}
“Give up specific characteristics!
Abandon all doubt in your mind!
Expand your knowledge like space!
You must become a buddha like me!” {4.107} {TK122}
Immediately after the Blessed Buddha had spoken these verses, the sage Jyotīrasa and his retinue saw the Blessed One transform into the form, features, and deportment of a buddha as their previously accumulated roots of virtue became activated. The sage Jyotīrasa then attained a state of absorption such that, sitting like the bodhisattva Peak of the Victory Banner, he was able to see into all states of absorption without depending on any other factors. Through all these forms of absorption,  his state became such that nobody could take it away from him. He attained the bodhisattva absorption called Ratnaketu.
The great sage, holding a flower in his folded hands, then praised the Blessed One with the following verses: {K103}
“O protector of the world worthy of infinite praise! A confirmed speaker of truth!
You have illuminated the entire world with the light from your eye of wisdom.
For the benefit of beings, you always elevate your courage and loving kindness.
O best of beings, leader free from attachment, I prostrate to you today! {4.108}
“With your golden color and glow of golden light, your cooling qualities
Help inspire the causes that lead to the attainment of awakening in all beings.
By turning the wheel of the Dharma, you split the mountain of the afflictions {TK123}
And perfect the supreme conduct and the causes of understanding awakening. {4.109}
“O great physician, the best of beings adorned with auspicious marks,
Guide, please explain today how the essence of a being becomes buddha.
May I tear apart the net of craving; when I am saved, may I save the world!
Please tell me, O best of humans, when will I become a buddha? {4.110}
“I will ferry beings across the river of suffering, free them from the ocean of existence,
And establish them on the path to the undefiled bliss of nirvāṇa.
I beg any buddhas living in the ten directions, ocean-like with their vast qualities,
To be my witness—for I commit my mind to awakening. {4.111} {K104}
“ May the suffering of all beings 
Touched by violent, rough, and unbearable pain be pacified today
By the power of merit accumulated by me in the three times with my body, speech, and mind.
May all beings attain the bliss of the buddhas and find lasting nirvāṇa. {4.112}
“May the maladies of all beings be quelled and the waters of afflictions dried up!
May they obtain wisdom and sound sense faculties! {TK124}
May I swiftly liberate, through the brilliant splendor of my merit,
All the beings overwhelmed by suffering, cut down by death! {4.113}
“May all beings, each and every one of them, attain an ocean of qualities!
May they be satisfied with knowledge, limitless merit, and all pleasures!
May they attend to the abandoning of negativities and the view of equality!
May they all remember their previous births and practice the Dharma! {4.114}
“May they all cross to the other shore of the ocean of existence on the raft of Dharma!
May all reach the far shore of Dharma! May all become buddhas!
May the rain of the Dharma fall and then remain for immeasurable eons!
May all beings be bathed in the water from this Dharma cloud! {4.115} {K105}
“Whatever subtle transgressions I have committed with my body, speech, and mind,
I humbly confess, begging all the buddhas to be my witness!
May I never again commit such deeds inspired by evil views! {TK125}
May I see such inconceivably supreme beings always before me! {4.116}
“Whatever little merit I have accumulated I dedicate to awakening.
For the sake of beings, I will perform any action and endure any suffering.
I will bring all beings onto the supreme path of awakening.
For eons I will purify buddha fields, wisdom, and the ocean of beings. {4.117}
“May I reach the place where I touch awakening and attain purification.
May my whole retinue be purified and abide on the level of acceptance.
O leonine speaker, may I attain the five superknowledges.
O leader with your unimpeded wisdom and omniscience, please make my prophesy! {4.118}
“If I should become a buddha, a paragon of all the qualities of buddhahood in this world,
May I cast loose flowers upon you and shade you with a parasol!
May the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and the rest of the people be my witness,
And may the Earth, trembling, bow her head to your feet.” {4.119} {K106} {TK126}
Then the sage Jyotīrasa cast the flowers he had just spoken of upon the Blessed One, and they became a single parasol floating above the crown of his head. When he saw this, satisfying feelings of tremendous and extraordinary joy and pleasure arose in Jyotīrasa’s mind.  He fell to his knees and touched the Blessed One’s feet. As soon as he did so, the entire great trichiliocosm shook in six different ways. The hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of beings who were there became so moved that they beheld a vision.
Those beings who were capable of being guided by elephants perceived the Well-Gone One in the form of an elephant. They were overjoyed. When they saw the flowers cast by the great sage transformed and floating in the sky as a parasol and the earth shaking, {TK127} they fell to the Blessed One’s feet in amazement. Those who were capable of being guided by buddhas all perceived the Blessed One in the guise of a buddha and were wonderstruck.
When the Blessed One then emerged from his absorption, becoming indestructible, those beings who were capable of being guided by buddhas felt joyous and exhilarated on seeing him emerge and showered him with all the flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, scented oils, clothes, ornaments, and adornments they had. For this occasion, the Blessed One, addressing Jyotīrasa, uttered the following stanzas: {K107}
“O great sage! Rise up and listen as I am making a prediction.
The guide is making your prediction of awakening.
Through unequaled power, the earth shook 
And flowers became a parasol floating in the sky. {4.120}
“You will become the best of two-legged creatures,
A powerful buddha and instructor who teaches to benefit the world,
One of infinite merit, vast as the sky,
The best in the threefold universe, and a lamp for the world.” {4.121}
Jyotīrasa, the bodhisattva great being, then asked, “In what buddha field will I turn the wheel of the Dharma?”  {TK128}
The Blessed One replied, “In countless eons, you will appear in a buddha field to the north called Extensive Scent of Flowers. This buddha field will be arranged just as the present-day world of Sukhāvatī is. You will fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood in this buddha field. You will be a thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha, someone learned and virtuous, a well-gone one, a knower of the world, a charioteer who guides beings, an unsurpassed being, and a teacher of gods and humans. You will be known as the blessed buddha Immaculate Fragrant Star of Bright Splendor. Your lifespan will extend to an intermediate eon. There will be no hearers or solitary buddhas in your buddha field; it will be a realm exclusive to bodhisattva great beings. You will only give Great Vehicle teachings there.”
When the assembly that had amassed there heard the prophecy of the bodhisattva great being Jyotīrasa, they exerted themselves in venerating the Blessed One. The five hundred young brahmins and ninety-two trillion other beings there developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening. They achieved the bodhisattva absorption called not forgetting the mind of awakening.
This concludes the chapter on the sage Jyotīrasa, the fourth in the “Ratnaketu Dhāraṇī.” {K108} {TK130}
Chapter 5
The millions of māras then thought, “We should adorn the gates of the city through which the Blessed One is to enter, as well as the earth surrounding them, with sublime and magnificent ornaments in the same manner as the gods, nāgas, and yakṣas have adorned the surroundings of the city.”
With his mind, however, the Blessed One knew the thoughts of the millions of māras, and he manifested a miracle such that through the twelve gates of the city, twelve blessed buddhas entered the city of Rājagṛha. The millions of māras then, while hovering in the sky, adorned the city gates, the area around them, the city walls, its trees, and the surface of the earth with magical ornaments of the māra realm, as well as countless other magnificent miraculous manifestations set in the finest and most beautiful arrangements. Some of the millions of māras transformed into guises ranging from that of Brahmā to those of great sages. {TK131} From their perch in the sky, they placed various flowers, incense, scented powders, garlands, gold, silver, jewels, and pearls on the windows, ledges, and turrets of the mansions in the city, as well as in the trees. They also cast down a rain of cloth, cotton, linen, and ornaments, played many instruments, and venerated the Blessed One with songs of praise, extolling his qualities. The Blessed One then entered Rājagṛha’s city gates, adorned as they were with a supremely extensive and elevating display made in such a novel, incredible, and miraculous fashion. 
As he entered, he touched the threshold of the city gate with the big toe of his right foot. As soon as he did so, the entire great trichiliocosm shook in six different ways. This earthquake was felt by Śakra, Brahmā, Sūrya, Candra, the world protectors, and Maheśvara, as well as all leaders of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas, and also by the gods of the earth, water, oceans, cities,  and countryside. It was also felt by all the men, women, {TK132} boys, and girls and all the retinues of the divine great sages up to the Unexcelled Heaven. The earthquake immediately mobilized all these majestic beings to gather at the area surrounding the city of Rājagṛha. From the ground below and the sky above, they cast flowers and incense powder, suitable to the season, toward the Blessed One.
The Blessed One then scattered the flowers, powders, and so forth into each of the ten directions in order to venerate and honor the buddhas in all the buddha fields—pure as well as impure, empty as well as not empty—that are as numerous as the atoms in existence. The following verses then rang out from the flowers, powders, and ornaments in those buddha fields:
“Quickly, wake up! Consider these things.
Act conscientiously for awakening.
Liberate all the beings
Wandering in the chasm of saṃsāra! {5.1}
“As the time is ripe,
Give up all distractions.
Bring your past promises to mind {TK133}
And you will attain the prophecy of awakening. {5.2}
“The lord of sages, the great sage for whom there is no anguish,
Has come to the city today to benefit beings.
He has defeated billions of māras,
So the wheel of Dharma is set to be turned. {5.3}
“Friends! He is delighting beings in this state of peace!
He is displaying the substance of his supreme courage!
Having liberated beings from their suffering,
He will grant prophecies of awakening today! {5.4}
“The self-arisen one has entered the city that is beyond misery.
Therefore, hasten to that buddha field!
Behold those beautiful things there
And gradually orient yourselves toward awakening!” {5.5}
Then the bodhisattva great beings, hearers, and great hearers who were settled in mental composure in the grove of Veṇuvana gazed at the Teacher. They saw that the Blessed One was at the gate of the city of Rājagṛha, calm and collected.  All these bodhisattva great beings and great hearers also saw the ranks and formations {TK134} on the edges at the Blessed One’s sides.
The sound of the verses that came from the flower and powder decorations then rang out in the buddha fields—pure and impure, empty and not empty—as numerous as the atoms existing throughout the ten directions. When the bodhisattva great beings and hearers in those buddha fields heard the sound, they thought, “How pleasing this sound is. How enjoyable, delightful, satisfying, and pleasant it is. Its great qualities are indeed worthy of praise. Now, whence have this sound and this rain of flowers and powders come?” The bodhisattva great beings and great hearers thus halted their individual virtuous activities in utter amazement.
The blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni then entered into an absorption called corresponding to the causes of the Buddha’s ornaments and jewelry. As soon as he entered this absorption, {TK135} an immense display appeared throughout this entire Sahā world and all the buddha fields throughout the ten directions. They all became just like the future thus-gone Samantadarśin’s buddha field, which is called Pure and Unstained. In all the buddha fields with their world systems as numerous as atoms, throughout the ten directions, that were all unconstructed yet marvelously adorned, the blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni appeared—clearly, precisely, and brilliantly—entering the city gates of Rājagṛha.  As the bodhisattva great beings and great hearers in those buddha fields heard these sounds, they were intrigued. Gazing in all directions, they all saw the Sahā world—not very far away. Through the domain of the Buddha, they also saw the divine, miraculously created ornaments.
The bodhisattva great beings and great hearers then thought, “We should go to see and examine the presence of that great assembly and the qualities of the buddha field. We should go to see, venerate, and serve the thus-gone Śākyamuni. {TK136} There we will definitely receive our prophecies of unsurpassed and perfect awakening!”
Through the thus-gone Śākyamuni’s miraculous power, bodhisattva great beings and great hearers as numerous as the atoms in all the buddha fields throughout the ten directions then disappeared from their own buddha fields and arrived instantaneously in this Sahā world. When the countless, limitless bodhisattva great beings, who were as numerous as the atoms in all the buddha fields, arrived from each of the ten directions, they filled the earth and the sky above this buddha field entirely. Due to the power of the cause that is in accord with these bodhisattva great beings’ roots of virtue, they set out venerating the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
In order to venerate the Blessed One, some bodhisattva great beings covered the entire buddha field {TK137} with a rain of various flowers, while others cast down showers of pearls, and so forth. In order to venerate the Blessed One, yet others cast down showers of gold, silver, beryl,  crystal, emerald, coral, white sandalwood, uraga sandalwood, and the powdered leaves of the palm tree, thus filling the sky. In order to venerate the Blessed One, others cast down a rain of dangling and swaying ornaments and various cloth and linens. In order to venerate the Blessed One, some held up jeweled parasols, banners, and flags. In order to venerate the Blessed One, some anointed the earth with various scents. Some tossed jeweled garlands. Some played instruments and cymbals. Some sang and danced. Some played music. Some cleansed the earth with scented water. Some bore jeweled vessels containing jewels to the Blessed One. Some {TK138} filled jeweled vessels with scented water, decorated them with flowers, fruits, and leaves, and bore them to the Blessed One. Some decorated jeweled trees with divine cloth, jewelry, flowers, and fruits and held them high.
Some transformed themselves into the guise of Mahābrahmā and prostrated to the Blessed One with palms joined together. Standing there, they made extensive offerings in the manner just mentioned. Some transformed themselves into the guise of lions, prostrated to the Blessed One, and took their places. Drawing on the Blessed One’s miraculous power and the strength of their own roots of virtue, the beings there were able to perceive one another’s forms unimpededly with their own eyes. The Blessed One then entered the city of Rājagṛha through the transformative power of the gods of the great māra realm, as well as his own applications of mindfulness, right exertions, bases of supernatural power, faculties, strengths, limbs of awakening,  paths, and eighteen unique qualities of a buddha. {TK139} He then proceeded to a lotus that was right in the center of the road, touched the head of the flower with his right palm, and picked it up. As he plucked the lotus, it vibrated, which caused all the encircling mountains, greater encircling mountains, Mount Sumeru, the great oceans, and all the māra realms in this buddha field to shake. The celestial palaces, abodes, beds, and seats in the māra realms also shook violently. All the māra boys and girls and their retinues there were terrified and worried and said to one another, “Since our celestial palaces do not shake for no reason, perhaps Māra, our king, has passed from his domain? What if we are also to die and pass from our home? We should definitely go to see what is happening!”
Once they saw what had happened, they thought, “If this buddha field is influenced by the five degenerations, who has then ornamented it so? Who has made it so pleasant?”
Then, as the māras and their servants were standing in that place, they saw the thus-gone Śākyamuni seated there—shining, {TK140} gleaming, brilliant, and adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being. They did not recognize even a single one of the many other beings of various forms, colors, characteristics, and shapes that existed in the whole trichiliocosm, including this entire buddha field. Yet they saw each of those beings exerting themselves in venerating the Blessed One.
It then occurred to them, “We must by all means go to see the thus-gone Śākyamuni, pay our respects to him, and ask him where our leader and his servants have gone.” {K108}
The billion māras together with their retinues arrived in the presence of Blessed Śākyamuni and took their seats. Māra, the evil one, bowed with folded hands in the direction of the Blessed One and said:
“Blessed One! With faith born in my mind,
I am going to take refuge in you.
Promptly release me from my chains {TK141}
And I will authentically practice the Dharma.” {5.6}
The Blessed One replied:
“I never stop anyone
From coming or leaving.
If you know the way, 
You are free to go wherever you please.” {5.7}
The evil one said:
“Whenever I try to go as I like 
To my own domain,
O Gautama, I find myself tied 
With a fivefold noose!”{5.8}
The Blessed One replied: {K109}
“All my concepts have ceased;
I am liberated and thus liberate beings.
I have given up harming others 
And now liberate beings from bondage.” {5.9}
The Blessed One then looked with his buddha eye at the entire buddha field and, seeing it completely filled with beings that live on earth and in the sky, recited the following stanzas:
“Hear now my advice, all of you, {TK142}
With a focused mind!
Cast away all your doubts
And then keep quiet! {5.10}
“A fully realized Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha 
Are hard to find in this world.
Hard to find are faith, sincere application, 
And the practice of awakening. {5.11}
“It is rare to be able to hear the Dharma 
From the protector of the world himself.
It is difficult to find the right time
 To train in patience. {5.12}
“It is rare in this world
 To be able to relinquish negative conceptual thinking,
To cultivate emptiness,
And to tame the mind. {5.13}
“The conduct of awakening, as I had formerly practiced, 
Is difficult to find.
I will teach you therefore 
How it should be fostered. {5.14} {TK143}
“I will teach the greatest of paths 
That dispels the mass of darkness, 
Connects us to awakening, 
And totally liberates us from the fetters of existence. {5.15} {K110}
“You should cast away the three stains
And listen to the teacher’s instructions.
Having cast off the snare of craving, 
You should cross to the other shore of the four rivers. {5.16}
“You must win the threefold liberation,
Establish yourselves in the three types of restraint,
And then remove all of the afflictions there are 
In the threefold universe. {5.17}
“To worship the lineage of the Three Jewels
And for the sake of Dharma,
All of you gathered here should scrupulously eliminate 
The ignorance of the three times that obscures the mind. {5.18}
“Through the emanation of the blessings 
Of the buddhas, gods, and māras,
Obtain a pacifying acceptance 
That is beyond the threefold universe. {5.19}
“Ordinary beings 
Spoiled by the four errors,
Who conceptualize nonthings, 
Are not vessels for this acceptance. {5.20}
“When the visual faculty is attached to form, {TK144}
It obscures body, speech, and mind.
Those who are devoid of the four concentrations 
Obsess over saṃsāra. {5.21}
“Those whose learnedness illuminates the world—
Those who cultivate concentration—
Could today be liberated 
From the four errors. {5.22}
“These lords save beings 
From the four rivers.
Those who gain a certain understanding of birth and death 
Cross to the far shore. {5.23}
“Fearless bodhisattvas 
Endowed with four limbs
Break the bonds that bind beings to existence 
By means of correct knowledge. {5.24} {K111}
“By totally comprehending the five aggregates, 
One is freed from their noose.
No longer driven into endless rebirths, 
One has crossed to the far shore of the ocean of existence. {5.25}
“You should confess your wrongdoings 
In front of the buddhas
And, having abandoned all negativity, 
Fearlessly reach the far shore. {5.26}
“By repeatedly taking rebirth in existence 
And coming under the influence of evil companions,
One experiences the sufferings 
Of saṃsāra and conditioned phenomena. {5.27}
“Steering clear of wicked friends {TK145}
And wrong views,
And remembering the suffering of saṃsāra, 
Apply yourselves to the sublime Dharma. {5.28}
“Drink this finest elixir. 
Meditate on emptiness.
From the point of view of the absolute truth, 
There are no objects, no substantiality, and no characteristics. {5.29}
“As the five sense organs are empty, 
No agent can be found there.
What are merely entities characterized by thoughts 
Are likewise inactive. {5.30}
“The six sensations and six forms of craving 
Arise from the six types of contact. 
In the same way, you should understand 
That the five sense bases arising from contact are empty. {5.31}
“Consider how one imputes ‘thingness’ 
To what is naturally not a thing.
Beings unborn and unceasing—
Consider how insubstantial they are. {5.32}
“All phenomena are subsumed under a single principle 
And have no ‘thingness’ in any of the three times.
Those who know this will be free from fever;
This is the unsurpassed path. {5.33}
“Freedom is certain in these thirteen respects. 
It is the cultivation of acceptance
That destroys the perceptions of beings 
And liberates subjectivity.” {5.34}
When through the power of the Blessed One’s merit, {TK146} his strength of fearlessness, and the influence of his merit according to his roots of virtue {K112} he chanted these verses with the unimpeded sound of his voice, his words of the maṇḍala of space were heard throughout the ten directions in worlds—with and without the five degenerations—equal in extent to the infinite grains of sand in the Gaṅgā. Immediately, infinite hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of beings in every buddha field obtained faith and undefiled joy. They proceeded irreversibly to unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Some attained absorption, acceptance, or different dhāraṇīs. Those who were gathered in this buddha field obtained the level of irreversibility when they heard the Blessed One’s words, syllables, and meaning. Infinite numbers of beings attained renunciation according to one of the three vehicles.
Jyotīrasa, the bodhisattva great being, magically created the stairs,  made of the seven precious gems and shaded with flowers, for ascending to the lotus throne and, with hands folded in the direction of the Blessed One, implored:
“O omniscient one, gaze upon the entire world 
Sunk in the mire of aging and death’s agonies.
Raise the Dharma bridge 
For the animate and inanimate worlds. {5.35}
“Gaze upon your field into which have been born {TK147}
Myriads of beings with folded hands.
Distribute your Dharma gifts! 
Show us your miraculous power! {5.36} {K113}
“For those tormented by the afflictions, 
Reveal the knowledge and the means!
Ascend to the peerless lotus seat, O Lord, 
And rain down the rain of the Dharma. {5.37}
“With all the buddhas in the ten directions 
And other wise sages here as your witnesses,
Leader of the victors, 
Destroy the māras! {5.38}
“Knowing that all phenomena are empty like space 
And inseparable from their intrinsic nature,
Remember your past promises! 
Turn the unsurpassed and sublime wheel! {5.39}
“O lion among humans, liberate now 
The beings swirling in the midst of the four rivers.
Knowing all phenomena, please liberate the world 
From the ocean of the three existences. {5.40}
“Your mind is so powerful, O Blessed One! 
Please dispel the destructive stains of existence
And teach the unparalleled Dharma 
To we who joyfully wish to enter the path of the well-gone ones.” {5.41}
The Blessed One then climbed atop the lotus throne via the magically emanated staircase and took his seat at the center of the lotus. Gazing in all ten directions, the Blessed One {TK148} then addressed the evil Māra: “O Māra, evil one, you are the reason that the Dharma teaching of the Great Collection was taught here today, whereby countless infinite beings will be liberated and freed from the misery of being in the womb, as well as from aging and death. They will cross over the four rivers.  They will travel the peaceful path. They will realize that wisdom that is equal to space. Evil Māra, because you have set the proliferation of these beings’ roots of virtue in motion, you should rejoice! Evil Māra, you should request me to teach the Dharma. Then I shall teach the Dharma so that those in your Māra world may be able to cross the rising river.
Then Māra, the evil one, spoke the following verse:
“If you, joyful one, have no animosity, aggression, or arrogance,
Why are you teaching the Dharma to inspire fear in us today?
If you had animosity, arrogance, and pride,
Explain liberation to me, O Lord of Sages.” {5.42}
The Blessed One responded:
“When I was on the earth, spending ten months in the womb,
You, Māra, attempted to murder me.
At that time, I held no grudge or even the slightest animosity;
I was patient and had destroyed all animosity without exception. {5.43}
“As soon as I was born, you caused the earth to quake
And brought down a rain of stones intended to kill me.
Then you dried up my mother’s breast milk.
You have tried to harm me in many different ways. {5.44}
“When I was resting in absorption, you brought ten thousand damsels. {TK149}
And when I was living on alms, you cut off my access to food.
You constantly tried to give me royal dominion.
In the night when I left the palace, you created a dense darkness. {5.45}
“At that time you and many people surrounded the city,
And through your magical powers you brought about a fierce storm and rain.
You made the ground rise up a full fathom and covered me in rocks.
And while I was abiding in tranquility, you made a great clamor. {5.46}
“When I was performing austerities, you sent cold winds.
When I was beside a waterfall, you sent a flood.
You unleashed lions in order to do away with me.
And at that time, you also poisoned my food. {5.47}
“When I went before the Bodhi tree,
You brought down a rain of vajras, meteors, razors, and arrows.
And when I sat on the vajra seat for the sake of beings,
You even smeared daubs of mud on my saffron robes. {5.48}
“You also sent damsels before me.
You yourself came to murder me with your magical might.
However, you could not harm my mind even slightly.
Once I had tamed you, I attained unsurpassed awakening. {5.49}
“Yet, you had no shame in coming here to talk,
And with your evil behavior attempting to dissuade the supreme Kāśyapa and others.
Pitilessly, you bring billions of beings to ruin.
Even now, do you still attempt to oppose and deceive me? {5.50}
“When I was fasting
You sent a dangerous and drunken elephant to kill me.
Devadatta cast boulders down a hill toward me. {TK150}
Alas! For three months I ate horse fodder. {5.51}
“To incite gossip, you sent alluring ladies to surround me.
You filled pits with terrible blazing embers. 
You put swift-acting poison in my food.
Therefore, you, evildoer, are rotten to the core. {5.52}
“You came here with your armies, children, and forces
Brandishing lances, swords, and arrows to kill me with.
Yet if you have failed to ruffle even one hair of mine,
What are you still doing here, so proud of yourself? {5.53}
“Though you force these billions of māras to keep opposing me,
Trillions of beings have come here, 
Filling the entire buddha field, acting as my witnesses, 
To see that I have nothing but a supremely loving mind toward you. {5.54}
“I am steeped in compassion, caring for beings.
You are so vicious, constantly trying to obstruct me.
These lords of sages, foremost among humans, are under my power,
And so in this final age, I will perform the deeds of a buddha. {5.55}
“I engage in the benefit of beings with a totally free mind.
Even as you speak, I do not relinquish my patience.
I have no jealousy, animosity, or anger in my mind.
I constantly exert myself to protect even you. {5.56}
“So, just as you requested and to put your mind at ease, I will explain
A nectar-like Dharma that utterly pacifies the threefold universe.
Thus all your evil activities will be put to an end. 
Quickly, entrust your mind to me, the protector of the world. {5.57} {TK151}
“Though you are always intent on harming,
My heart is always loving, with the aim to liberate you.
Give up this evil attitude and arouse faith in your mind.
Before long I will prophesy your awakening.” {5.58}
Māra, the evil one, became furious with the Blessed One. Disturbed and distressed, he wished to turn back but now noticed he was bound by a fivefold noose. He wished to cry out in fear, but was unable. Through the power of his anger, he blew out incredibly hot breath to kill the Blessed One. Yet the Blessed One transformed it into a most exquisite flower, which he then blessed so that it became a very pleasing parasol in the space directly above the crowns of the heads of all the blessed buddhas dwelling, flourishing, and teaching the Dharma in all the buddha fields throughout the ten directions. The bodhisattva great beings in each of those buddha fields asked their respective blessed buddhas, “Where have these flower parasols come from? And due to whose magical power?”
The blessed ones answered the bodhisattva great beings, saying, “Noble children, there is a world called the Sahā world.A thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha called Śākyamuni made aspirations in the past to fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood within that buddha field, which is rife with the afflictions and the five degenerations and where he now teaches the Dharma. This thus-gone one is about to give an exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility.
“This exposition completely destroys the forces of the entire dominion of Māra and elevates all the strengths, the types of fearlessness, and the domains of a buddha. It ensures the continuity of the teachings of the buddhas and the lamp of the Three Jewels. {TK152} It activates the blessings of his diligence  to increase all roots of virtue. It destroys all enemies and obstructers. It pacifies the ordinary, the inauspicious, disputes, bad dreams, evil omens, famine, the mass of fears, struggle, warfare, captivity, fighting, arguments, drought, unseasonable heat and cold, storms, heat waves, sickness, and unpleasant sounds. It motivates all the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and human and nonhuman beings. It summons and motivates the warrior caste. It engages the four castes in the service of Dharma. It sets ablaze the torch of insight and teaches a direct path. It motivates all the households, towns, cities, villages, districts, countryside, royal cities, and hinterlands. It aligns constellations, planets, nights, days, months, fortnights, and years. It ensures good harvests and an abundance of flowers, fruits, grains, and medicinal herbs. It accomplishes all manufacturing and business ventures and supervisory tasks. It pacifies all the faults of body, speech, and mind. {K114} It increases insight, mindfulness, intelligence, interest, courage, stability, patience, and eloquence. It awakens the unobstructed vision of all phenomena. It blesses the Dharma tradition with the four noble attributes. It elucidates the Great Vehicle. It nurtures bodhisattva great beings and gives comfort to them. It blesses the vajra-like minds of those at the stage of irreversibility. It makes beings realize the acceptance that phenomena are unborn. It establishes beings in realization consistent with {TK153} the tenth bodhisattva level. It cares for beings that require guidance. It turns the wheel  of Dharma. It covers all beings with great compassion. It engages them in the practice of the perfections. It establishes them on the unsurpassed path. It rains Dharma. It satisfies all beings with the essence of Dharma. It completes the fully awakened intention of the buddhas. It brings freedom from the domain of the four māras. It places beings in the expanse of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates.
“This exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility, was given, blessed, and rejoiced at, upon each other’s giving it, by all the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas of the past. Whatever blessed buddhas now dwell and pass their time in the ten directions, teaching the Dharma there, they all give, bless, and rejoice in each other’s offering of this exposition. In the future, whatever thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas will dwell in other worlds {TK154} in the ten directions, they all will also {K115} give, bless, and rejoice in each other’s offering of this exposition.”
Hearing this, all the bodhisattva great beings who dwelled in these buddha fields asked their respective buddhas, “What is this exposition, O Blessed One, that we haven’t heard before  and that is a treasure trove of so many qualities, that is endowed with inconceivable qualities, that grants unobstructed vision of all phenomena, . . . and that pacifies? Please, O Blessed One, give this exposition that completely destroys the forces of the entire dominion of Māra . . . and places beings in the expanse of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. Give it out of compassion for the world, for the benefit and happiness of many people. It will surely be in the interest of great numbers of beings, bringing benefit and happiness to gods and humans alike.”
The blessed buddhas replied to the bodhisattvas, {TK155} “O noble children! We also are going to the Sahā world where the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni dwells. Similarly, whatever blessed buddhas now dwell and pass their time in the ten directions in their respective worlds, they are all going along with their retinues of bodhisattvas and congregations of hearers to the Sahā world where the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni dwells. {K116} Together with the thus-gone Śākyamuni they will give, bless, and rejoice in each other’s offering of this exposition  in order to benefit all beings by stopping them from committing evil acts, fully establishing them in wholesome conduct, and filling them with unsurpassed wisdom.
“Once all these blessed buddhas have gathered today in the Sahā world along with their retinues of bodhisattvas and congregations of hearers, they will give this exposition there. So, if any of you wants to hear this exposition and to worship the blessed buddhas, as innumerable as the grains of sand in the river Gaṅgā, {TK156} who are abiding together at the same time in the same buddha field, and if any of you want to hear their teachings and to see the domains of all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, gods, māras, and the marvelous ornamentation of all the buddha fields, and if any of you want to see a gathering of buddhas such as has never been seen or heard of, let us now go together to the Sahā world where the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni dwells.”
The bodhisattva great beings replied to their respective buddhas, “If this is so, O venerable Blessed One, we shall go together with you, our thus-gone one, to the Sahā world where the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni dwells, {K117} in order to hear this exposition that we have not heard before.  We shall worship there, all at the same time and on the same occasion, in the same buddha field, infinite numbers of blessed buddhas living and spending their time there. We will request them to teach us the Dharma. We will see the Sahā world adorned with the miraculous displays originating from the four bases of supernatural power, and that great gathering in a marvelous array. And if we manage to get a place in that buddha field while the dhāraṇī included in this exposition is being recited, we will be able to honor, praise, serve, and worship the buddhas and the bodhisattva great beings who have gathered there.”
Then each of the blessed buddhas in his respective buddha field spoke to his own retinue of bodhisattva great beings and congregation of great hearers: {TK157}
“Do not be anxious, noble children, or have any doubts about whether there will be enough space available in that world to accommodate everybody. Why so? Because the blessed buddhas have an infinite ability to bring beings to maturity—an ability that derives from their skill in the wisdom of equality particular to their buddha fields. Because, O noble children, the thus-gone Śākyamuni has such great skillful means, he has the ability to expand space. {K118} Noble children, imagine that he is able to accommodate in a single mustard seed all the beings, who depend for existence on physical elements and sense faculties, taken together from their respective realms, even if each and every one of them were as big as Mount Meru. Each of them would have ample room for themselves and none would even arrive in one another’s field of vision. Even if the bodies of all beings were placed in a single mustard seed, they would not appear to shrink, nor would the seed appear to grow. The thus-gone Śākyamuni, noble children, is indeed endowed with such skill in means.
“And furthermore, O noble children, whatever solidity there is in existence constitutes the earth element. The thus-gone Śākyamuni could place  all of it within a single particle of dust, and this particle, with all of the earth element having entered there, would not appear to expand, nor would the earth element appear to shrink. With such skill in means is the thus-gone Śākyamuni endowed.
“Again, O noble children, anything that appears as wet constitutes the water element—the thus-gone Śākyamuni could place all of it on a single hair tip, {TK158} and this hair tip, with all the water element having entered there, would not appear to expand, nor would the water element appear to shrink. With such skill in means is the thus-gone Śākyamuni endowed.
“And further, O noble children, whatever of the wind element is known to exist, the thus-gone Śākyamuni could place all of it within a single pore. This entire element of wind, {K119} even though contained within a single pore of skin, would be able to move around, provided with ample room as if within its own usual sphere of activity.
“Again, O noble children, anything that appears as hot constitutes the fire element. The thus-gone Śākyamuni could place anything relating to the fire element that has arisen, is arising, or will arise within a single particle of dust. Even if the entire fire element was gathered there in a single particle, it would still be able to function within that single particle, provided with ample range as if within its own usual domain.
“And further, O noble children, whatever buddha fields there are in the ten directions, the thus-gone Śākyamuni could place all of them, together with all the beings there and the four great elements, on a single hair tip.
“Then, in that infinitely small space, all those beings and the great elements would be able to go about their usual business and move around as if in their own usual spheres of operation, provided with sufficient space. They would not get into each other’s way, and this infinitely small space would not appear to expand, nor would they appear to shrink. With such skill in means is the thus-gone Śākyamuni endowed.
“And further, O noble children, the thus-gone Śākyamuni can know the six sense bases, conduct, grasping, aspirations, blessings, ranges of speech, sounds, phonemes, expressions of language, actions or endeavors that involve the three predispositions, aggregates, analytical minds, and the range of methods for gathering accumulations of all the beings of the three times, in a single instant. {TK159} He is able to know anything at all about any being from the far reaches of the past to that which generates the rebirths in saṃsāra of any of the six kinds of beings throughout the three times,  as well as their deaths, births, and what occurs for each of them. He can know the extent of the particles of earth. He can know how beings pass the moments and hours throughout the three times. He can know every pore of all beings throughout the three times. He can know the extent of the enjoyments, behaviors, and experiences of happiness and suffering of all beings throughout the three times. The thus-gone Śākyamuni can know all this within a single instant. {K120}
“The thus-gone Śākyamuni is able to comprehend the three times up to their farthest limit effortlessly and without ideas or concepts, because he is endowed with this kind of clairvoyant wisdom that is miraculous in character. The thus-gone Śākyamuni is endowed with such immeasurable means to bring beings to maturity through equanimity, O noble children, because of his skill in wisdom that derives from his buddha domain.”
When these characteristics were elucidated, infinite and uncountable hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas from the respective retinues of the thus-gone ones from all the different directions reached the perfection of insight, based on their previous aspirations.
This concludes the chapter on the characteristics of the Buddha, the fifth in the “Ratnaketu” section of the Great Collection of Mahāyāna sūtras. {K121} {TK160}
Chapter 6
At that time the thus-gone Akṣobhya set out from the world in the east called Abhirati in the company of an infinite number of bodhisattva great beings. Through the power and mastery of miracles particular to a buddha, he arrived instantaneously in the buddha field that includes the central world with its four continents, where the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni was staying. Having arrived, he sat upon a lotus seat that appeared just as needed. The bodhisattva great beings  from his retinue also sat upon lotus seats that appeared through their own magical power.
Headed by Akṣobhya, infinite numbers of the blessed buddhas living in buddha fields as numerous as atoms also arrived. They arrived in a split second, in the same buddha field that includes the central world with its four continents where the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni was staying. Each and every one of these thus-gone ones was accompanied by an infinite number of bodhisattva great beings and hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of hearers. Having arrived, they sat down upon lotus seats that appeared just as needed.
At the same time, the thus-gone Ratnadhvaja came from the south . . . and he sat upon a seat of lotus filaments. 
In the same way {TK161} there came from the north {K122} the thus-gone Dundubhisvara. Having arrived, he sat upon a seat of lotus filaments.
At the same time, the thus-gone Amitāyus came from the west. Having arrived . . . he sat upon a seat of lotus filaments.
Simultaneously, the thus-gone Vairocana came from below. Having arrived . . . he sat upon a seat of lotus filaments.
The thus-gone Jñānaraśmirāja came from above, accompanied by infinite and uncountable hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of bodhisattva great beings, just like specks of dust, hailing from the buddha fields above as numerous as the grains of sand in the river Gaṅgā. Through his mastery of miracles particular to a buddha, he started off, and within a single instant of thought he arrived in the buddha field that includes the central world with its four continents, where the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Śākyamuni was staying. Having arrived, he sat upon a lotus throne that appeared just as needed. The bodhisattva great beings all sat upon lotus seats that miraculously appeared through their own  mastery of magical power according to their individual stores of merit.
Some of the bodhisattvas who had thus gathered from the ten directions around the thus-gone Śākyamuni rained down gold from the Jambu River in an act of worship of the blessed thus-gone ones. Some circumambulated clockwise the entire buddha field. Some stood with folded hands in front of the blessed buddhas, eager to hear the Dharma. And some directed their minds and abided by modes of virtue particular to themselves.
Candraprapha, the princely youth, folded his hands and, drawing on his own magical power and the power of the blessed buddhas, {TK162} filled up the entire buddha field with the words that he sang: {K123}
“O moon-like sages, 
Removers of all doubt who have gathered here!
A gathering of the saṅgha such as this 
Has never been seen or heard of before. {6.1}
“Totally filled with bodhisattvas of supreme austerity 
And all the buddhas,
This buddha field is now a caitya, 
Honored by every other field. {6.2}
“It is not without a reason that you, 
The sun-like sages, the perfect buddhas,
Have come today to this field, rife with the five degenerations, 
Scorned as it is by beings. {6.3}
“Today the vile Māra will meet his ruin 
And his black faction will be destroyed,
While those with pure conduct stand united—
This is why they have come together. {6.4}
“Let your minds be filled with admiration, 
For the hordes of Māra are to be defeated.
Hear all about the peaceful nature of reality, 
And then awaken to perfect buddhahood! {6.5}
“You will understand that the Mahāyāna 
Is a path of practice with acceptance as its armor.
Hear this dhāraṇī-seal today 
In order to remove all afflictions! {6.6}
“Let us all together, with one voice, {TK163}
Invite the guides
Who will teach this means of protection 
While seated on their thrones. {6.7}
“May this invincible dhāraṇī, 
Which contains all the Dharma teachings 
And pacifies all obscurations, be taught 
So that the sublime Dharma may be made to remain for a long time.” {6.8}
Subsequently, infinite and uncountable numbers of bodhisattva great beings implored with a single voice, “O most compassionate blessed buddhas! Please remain on your lotus seats and teach now this dhāraṇī that is suffused with the utmost loving kindness and acceptance, is composed with great skill, and contains all Dharma teachings—the one that removes fear; enables escape from all the domains of Māra; topples the banner of Māra, and raises the banner of the Dharma; obliterates all afflictions; {K124} defeats all enemies, severs all doubts, brings one to omniscient wisdom, frees one from all fears, offers complete and matchless protection; ensures no loss of memory, intelligence, demeanor, or steadfastness with regard to all the qualities of the bodhisattvas; shows the complete array of conduct, skillful means, and wisdom; brings one to the sense bases, blessings, absorption, dhāraṇī, and acceptance that support perfect happiness; fosters proficiency in conventional knowledge, . . . and contains the essence of the thirty-seven factors of awakening.
“Please teach us this dhāraṇī in order to bring beings into contact with charismatic splendor, health, enjoyments, strength, good reputation, happiness, and a comfortable life; to increase eloquence and the powers of recollection and make us able to remember what has been heard without any loss of detail; to defeat all enemies; {TK164} to ensure good harvests; to bring the power to retain what has been learned and become a receptacle of mindfulness; and to help accomplish the right conduct and attain awakening.
“Please, O blessed buddhas, teach this dhāraṇī to us now so that this Dharma method will be upheld and remain for a long time and so that the lineage of the Three Jewels does not perish. Teach it to show the complete path  to unsurpassable awakening. Teach it to show the indivisibility of the ultimate reality, space, and suchness and the indivisibility of darkness, light, the observable, the unobservable, near, far, thought, concept, beings, the vital principle, individual soul, and person. Teach it to show that all phenomena are insubstantial, undifferentiable from the ultimate reality, and equal in their characteristic of not being born, arising, or ceasing. And teach it to show the indivisibility of the elements of earth, water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness.
“May all the blessed buddhas here recite for us this dhāraṇī, promulgated as the collection of all the Dharma teachings that constitute the path, so that, immediately upon hearing it, innumerable {K125} hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of beings directly realize the nature of the Three Jewels. May they then work as spiritual friends for each other’s benefit. May an infinite number of beings develop the wish to attain unsurpassable, perfect awakening, reach the stage of a non-returner, and each obtain a prophecy of attaining buddhahood.”
Thus addressed, all the blessed buddhas, now assuming responsibility for the delivery of the Dharma, fell silent and remained seated on their seats of lotus filaments. They entered an absorption that manifests equanimity according to the former aspirations of a buddha. {TK165} All the beings in all these buddha fields gained mindfulness, faith, inspiration, and devotion that served to quell all forms of suffering and to gather all roots of virtue. By merely beholding the blessed buddhas, the attachment, aggression, delusion, wrong views, pride, arrogance, haughtiness, personalistic false views, doubt, acquisition, craving for existence, and faults in the substratum comprising the minds and mental states of all the beings in all these buddha fields were all quelled. Each and every one of these beings had this perception:  “It is just me alone that is here to hear the Dharma before the Thus-Gone One. There is no one else! The entirety of the Blessed One’s mind is directed toward me. He is teaching me the Dharma in order to alleviate all forms of sickness. No one else has requested the Thus-Gone One so as to hear the Dharma.” This perception was possible because the buddhas entered an absorption that manifests impartiality according to the former aspirations of a buddha.
Whatever beings dwelled at that time in this entire buddha field, {K126} all of them, their senses alert, folded their hands and said in one voice:
“Please teach us the Dharma, O blessed buddhas! Teach us the Dharma, venerable well-gone ones! We will apply ourselves to the teachings of the blessed buddhas with earnestness.” {TK166}
At this point, the thus-gone Śākyamuni, in order to worship the other blessed buddhas, flooded this entire buddha field, through his blessings, with an exquisite and particularly powerful fragrance, far exceeding that of the already present array of aromas. And he placed in the hands of all the beings that were in all the buddha fields various jewels, flowers, chaplets, scented oils, parasols, banners, flags, ornaments, and embellishments, so that they could themselves worship the remaining blessed buddhas. 
He then said, “I beg your attention, O blessed buddhas in the other buddha fields in the ten directions. Please come to my buddha field so we may have a discussion. I made the aspiration in the past to awaken fully and completely to unsurpassed and perfect awakening in this world debased by the five degenerations, to take responsibility for liberating {K127} all beings from the weariness caused by heat, cold, and hot winds; for liberating, out of compassion, all the beings who have lost their sanity, lost their way, or, veiled by the dark veil of ignorance, been thrown into  the darkness of afflictions; and for all the beings who are on their way to being reborn in the three miserable realms, who fall into bad company and are deprived of good company, who spurn the wise, who commit the five acts of immediate retribution, who reject the sacred Dharma, who revile the noble ones, and who have no compassion in their hearts. I do this with the diligence, power, and effort that arise out of great compassion. 
Traveling on foot, I visit villages, towns, cities, countries, and capital cities. To benefit beings, I consume {TK167} small quantities of harsh and disagreeable food, tasteless and utterly disgusting. To develop their roots of virtue, I wear coarse rags for robes, unpleasant to the touch, made from scraps of cotton and hemp salvaged from garbage dumps. I live in places such as mountain wildernesses, forest thickets, deserted towns, or charnel grounds. I make my bedding from hemp, sticks, and leaves—rough, stale-smelling, and unpleasant to the touch. Donning the armor of skillful means, great compassion, and diligence, I engage beings in conversation in various ways. With kṣatriyas, I talk about the might of the king, with brahmins about the Vedas and astrology, {K128} with ministers about the administration of the country. I talk with physicians about the efficacy of mineral and herbal remedies, with merchants about buying and selling merchandise, and with householders about responsibilities pertaining to the affairs of the house. I talk with women about beauty, jewelry, pregnancy, and avoiding petty competition. With monks I discuss the delights of acceptance, good character, and the three types of activity.
“In order to bring beings to maturity, I set on the path of attainment those who have not yet reached it. I help those not yet realized to attain realization, those who have not had a direct experience to have it,  and those who are not yet liberated to become so. I relieve a variety of sufferings. I travel the country in order to bring beings to maturity.
“At such times, these beings curse and abuse me. Filled with envy, they falsely accuse me of indulging in sex. They harass me with hypocritical gossip and women’s tales—treacherous, wicked, untrue, and mean. They throw dirt upon me. They boldly approach me to slay me with weapons, poison, and fire, {TK168} raining upon me discuses, javelins, arrows, swords, spears, axes, and rocks. In order to kill me, they set upon me elephants, venomous snakes, lions, tigers, bulls, buffaloes, wolves, and athletes. They fill up my houses, monasteries, and temples with filth and foul odors. When my hearers enter a town {K129} to beg alms, these ignoble beings rudely follow them in the streets, dancing and singing. They employ many hundreds of thousands of stratagems to kill me, striving to obliterate my doctrine, extinguish the torch showing the way to the Dharma, bring down the banner of the Dharma, break the boat of the Dharma, and scatter my Dharma offerings.
“Now, may all of you, O blessed buddhas, look at the Dharma methods of the blessed buddhas of the past. Please consider how they had gathered together in this buddha field afflicted by the five degenerations in order to ensure the long continuity of the Dharma methods; to crush the entire force and the dominion of Māra; to prevent the interruption of the continuity of the lineage of the Three Jewels; to increase beings’ roots of virtue; to suppress the proclamations of all the hostile preachers of other doctrines; to pacify discord,  quarrels, famine, disease, invasions by foreign powers, enslavement, wars, disputes, unseasonable cold and hot spells, storms, torrential rains, hurricanes, the defects of body, speech, and mind, and wrong views; to propitiate all the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, {TK169} and human and nonhuman beings; to protect every house, village, town, city, and kingdom; to dispel all the wickedness, poison, evil spirits, blind infatuation, bad dreams, and bad omens; {K130} to provide beings with all the grain, medicine, fruits, flowers, and extracts that they need for livelihood; to engage the kṣatriyas, brahmins, vaiśyas, and śūdras in virtuous conduct; to generate the mind of awakening; to encourage the practice of the six perfections; to increase the wisdom, skillful means, powers of recollection, mental resourcefulness, demeanor, contemplation, devotion, valor, stability, and eloquence particular to the bodhisattva great beings; and to reach the other shore of wisdom that brings the reprieve of the final bodhisattva level.
“These thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas of the past taught, blessed, and rejoiced in each other’s giving of this Dharma discourse and exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility. So now, in exactly the same way, all of you, O blessed buddhas, who live and spend your time in the ten directions but have now come together for the sake of inquiry to this buddha field of mine afflicted by the five degenerations, who are now seated here all together, may all of you give, bless, and rejoice in each other’s offering of this Dharma discourse and exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility.
“Please do this in order to ensure the long continuity of this Dharma method, to crush the entire force  and dominion of Māra, . . . and to reach the other shore of unobstructed wisdom. Do this out of regard for my wish {TK170} that this sacred Dharma method will continue in this buddha field for a long time, will not be violated by any of the followers of other systems, and will not suffer annihilation, and also to ensure the continuity of the lineage of the Three Jewels, and provide sustenance to all beings by means of the nectar of Dharma.” {K131}
The blessed buddhas replied, “Yes, of course! We will certainly carry out our duties as buddhas and take charge of the Dharma situation in this buddha field. To ensure that this Dharma method continues for a long time, to crush the entire force and the dominion of Māra, . . . and to reach the other shore of unobstructed wisdom, we will give this Dharma discourse and exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility. All the beings who are in this buddha field, please listen! This dhāraṇī-seal is:
aṅkara aṅgara bhaṅkara prabhaṅkara bhayam iha mitraṃ bhase akhe akhamaṃbare dome domante kevaṭṭe keyūre samavahane samanta­bhadre dharme dharme dharmake japhale mitrānuphale phalavate gaṇe gaṇabaraṃte hili {TK171} hili hilā hilake jaṃbhavate ṭakase ṭakaṃte ṭakavarānte gaṇavahante hirinte śirinte vinduvate govāhe jure mitrajure juse agre abame satya tathatāṃ {K132} hulu hile candre sama dharme dharme kucuru mucuru aciṭṭa cili cili cicavaha culu culu mitravaha kulu kulu sara sara kuṭu kuṭu mahāsara tuṭu tuṭu mahāsatya hṛdaya puṣpe supuṣpe dhūma­parihāre abhaye rucire karakṣe abhayam astu vivāha titile  mamale paśvakha śiśira loka­vināyaka vajre vajre dhare vajra­vate vajra­dade cakra­vajre cakre cavate dhare dhare bhare bhare pūre ṭare huhure bhaṃgavivare śarīśa cili curu mūle {TK172} maṇḍale maṇḍane gagaraṇe mūḍake sarva­mūḍake dhidhirayani makhiśvaralayani {K133} riṣijani dharavaci caṇḍāla­same sarva­sasyādhiṣṭhānāc chidyantu vāhanā mamini phala­rati ojāgre vicini vanaraha bubure guru guru muru muru hili hili hara hara kākaṇḍavaha hihitām āyuhana kuṇḍa jvāla bhase gardane ādahani mārgābhirohaṇi phala­satye ārohavati hili hili yathā vajaya svāgra yathāparaṃ ca hṛdaya­bāha­satya paribhāva mārgābhirohaṇe {TK173} acala buddhi dada pracala pacaya piṇḍa­hṛdaya candra­caraha acale śodhane prakṛti­mārge ili ilile prabhe sāraprate sarvatra tathatā satyānugate {K134} anāvaraṇabrate alata aṃgure śāmini vibrahmavayo hi ahita avāhi niravayava aciramārga lana laghusare triratna­vaṃśe dharma­kāya jvalacandre samudravati mahādbhūtavyaya samudra vegava dhāraṇī­mudreṇa makhi­mudra sura­pratisaṃvid amudra āvartani saṃmoha skāra vidyutarasena kṣiti {TK174} mudrito si ye keci prathivī vāha baha baha baha kīṭakabaṭa śaila pratītya hṛdayena mudṛtā dhāraṇī dhara dhara dhara dantilā dantindālā huska sarva­hṛdaya mudrito si jaḍa javaṭṭa jakhavaṭa sumati mati mahādbhūta mudritā ye kecit ṣaḍ­āyatana­niśṛtā bhūtā ini mine sacane ghoṣasacane mudritā caryādhiṣṭhāna vāk­pathānanyathā mahā­puṇya­samuccayāvatāra mahā­karuṇayā mudritā sarva­samyak­pratipat {K135} cirarātraṃ jvalatu {TK175} dharma­netrī sarve muni­vṛṣabhā mahā­karuṇā­samādhijñāna­lābha­balena maitrītyāgāti­vīrya­balenādhiṣṭhitā sarva­bhūtopacayāya svāhā!”
Immediately, all the beings present in all the buddha fields thrice exclaimed, “Homage to all the buddhas! Homage! Homage to all the buddhas!” and then further marveled,  “How wonderful is this gathering of sages! How wonderful is this gathering of bodhisattva great beings and great hearers! How extraordinarily wonderful is this exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility! It shows how to master all the instructions of the Teacher, the Dharma methods, and the tradition of the Three Jewels. It destroys the army and the dominion of Māra and cuts his noose. It defeats all enemies. It raises up the banner of the Dharma. It protects the Dharma followers . . . and it completely fills the entire domain of the Buddha. This Dharma discourse and exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility, has presently been spoken by all the blessed buddhas in order to seal the hearts {TK176} of all beings and thus refine their five great elements, their conditioned intellect, and their six sense bases, until they attain the ultimate, final nirvāṇa.”
While this dhāraṇī formula was being recited, {K136} a great number of bodhisattva great beings, thirty times as many as there are grains of sand in the Gaṅgā, obtained the absorption and the acceptance that are engendered by this dhāraṇī.
On this occasion, the princely youth Candraprabha rose up from his seat and, looking around with folded hands, spoke as follows, filling the entire buddha field with his voice thanks to the blessing of the buddhas and his own magical power:
“Such a gathering of moon-like victors 
Is difficult to find,
And so are the bodhisattvas here, 
Knowledgeable and abiding by their great vows. {6.19}
“It is extremely difficult 
To find the chance to hear this dhāraṇī-seal,
Blessed by the compassionate lords 
To become a Dharma method. {6.20}
“This dhāraṇī-seal brings victory 
Over the enemies who side with Māra,
And, blessed by the perfect buddhas, 
It ensures the continuity of the Three Jewels. {6.21}
“It increases the joy of acceptance, 
Thus leading to the removal of all obscurations; {TK177}
It attracts all beings in this world 
And protects the kingdom. {6.22}
“It prevents bad activities in this life 
And halts wrong views;
It gives comfort to bodhisattvas 
And clearly shows the path to awakening. {6.23}
“It increases the six perfections 
And perfects virtuous conduct;
In particular, it has been empowered 
To increase skillful means, wisdom, and eloquence. {6.24}
“This dhāraṇī brings together the white faction, 
And it cannot be defeated.
An immaculate blazing torch, it illuminates the path to awakening 
For those who will thus experience the Dharma directly. {6.25}
“One should abandon all doubts 
And devote oneself entirely to the dhāraṇī—
It is the complete path 
Whereby awakening is realized. {6.26} {K137}
“We will propagate 
This invincible dhāraṇī
For the protection of Dharma teachers 
And the prosperity of students. {6.27}
“Which of you illustrious bodhisattvas present here 
Will uphold this dhāraṇī
As the means for eliminating obscurations 
And increasing the welfare of beings?” {6.28} {TK178}
In reply, the youthful bodhisattva great beings, as numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā, said with one voice, “We, too, uphold and bless this dhāraṇī. If any noble sons or daughters, any monks or nuns, or any male or female lay practitioners should teach this dhāraṇī, having for this purpose bathed, donned clean clothes, and ascended a lion throne that is soft and pleasant to the touch; inside a well-constructed pavilion covered in various flowers; perfumed with various fragrances; stocked up with refreshments of various tastes; fitted with cloth, soft fabrics, and adornments of various kinds; and provided with parasols, banners, and flags, no one would be able to disturb their thoughts, bodily humors, bodies, or minds  or give them breathing trouble or headaches. This could not possibly happen.
“No one would be able to inflict upon them any disease of the body, tongue, teeth, bones, throat, arms, back, internal organs, abdomen, pelvis, thighs, or shanks. Nor would anyone be able to interfere with their voice. {K138} If any Dharma teachers should be suffering, due to their previous accumulation of unskillful actions, from any disturbance of the humors or a loss of voice, all of them will be completely pacified when they recite this dhāraṇī. After the negative action is purified, they will become well.
“Also, the students of the Dharma who will attend their teaching will not be affected by any disturbance of the humors or a loss of voice. For those who hear this dhāraṇī, even if they had long been affected by any disturbance of the humors or a loss of voice due to their previous accumulation of unskillful actions, all of this will be cleared away.” {TK179}
At this point, Candraprabha, the princely youth, bowed with folded hands in the direction of the blessed buddhas and the surrounding bodhisattvas, as numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā, and said, “Please, O blessed buddhas, listen to and give your support for this dhāraṇī:
kṣante asamārope metre somavate ehi nava­kuṃjave nava­kuṃjave nava­kuṃjave mūla­śodhane vaḍhaka vaḍhaka māravatathatā pariccheda baḍhasa baḍhasa amūla acale dada pracalā vidhile ekanaya­pariccheda caṇḍatṛṇe bosare bosaratṛṇe khaga­suratṛṇe snava­suratṛṇe bhūta­koṭī {K139} pariccheda jalakha jalakha vaye jalakha namakṣakha kakakha ha ha ha ha phu phu phu phu {TK180} sparśa­vedana­pariccheda amama nyamama khyamama samudra mudra­bakha saṃskārāṇāṃ pariccheda bodhisa kṣitivima mahāvima bhūtakoṭi ākāśa­śvāsa­pariccheda svāhā!”
This dhāraṇī was applauded by all of the bodhisattva great beings and great hearers who were present in all the buddha fields, as well as other beings of great splendor—Śakra, Brahmā, the world protectors, and the lords of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas. 
The blessed buddhas said, “This dhāraṇī possesses great force and power; it subdues all enemies and completely removes fear, disease, bad dreams, and bad omens . . . and takes beings to the other shore of unobscured wisdom. The dhāraṇī just uttered is the outcome of the supreme wisdom that comes from the accumulations of great merit and wisdom.”
At that time, the great brahmā, Bhūteśvara by name, was seated before the blessed Amitāyus. Through his mastery of magical powers particular to a great brahmā, he took on a female form endowed with all the characteristics of supreme beauty and adorned with clothing, {TK181} ornaments, flowers, fragrances, and scented oils that exceeded in greatness even the celestial realms. 
Bhūteśvara, this great brahmā, now rose from his seat and said, with folded hands, “Please bless me, O blessed buddhas, with the maṇḍala of sound that conveys words and can magically deliver exegetical instructions, so that I can reach with my voice this entire buddha field and no obstacle will arise for me in this respect. {K140} Please bless me so that I can protect Dharma teachers and students through the articulation of mantra words. If any god or a male or female nāga, nāga elder, nāga with an entourage, or nāga offspring; . . . or a male or female piśāca, piśāca elder,  piśāca with an entourage, or piśāca offspring; or any human or nonhuman being should watch out for and seek an opportunity to attack a Dharma teacher or a Dharma student or approach them with an evil or hostile intent, or should disturb, harm, or remove so much as a single hair from their bodies—if any such evil being should steal their vital energy or even breathe upon them or look at them, even momentarily, with an evil intent, I will instantly restrain or punish these māras . . . or human and nonhuman beings, and {TK182} I will crush, confuse, and curse them.
“So please, O blessed buddhas, empower me with the maṇḍala of sound that conveys words, so that I will be able to penetrate with my voice the entire buddha field. Which of you will help me with this?”
The blessed buddhas remained silent, thus granting their consent. {K141}
A śakra by the name of Śikhindhara, whose body was adorned with the light of ornaments made of gold from the river Jambu, sat there for a moment before addressing Bhūteśvara the brahmā as follows: “You should not sit in front of the thus-gone Amitāyus, sister. Do not act in a casual manner and disturb the blessed one. Why so?
“Naive people delight in the discursiveness of mind, 
But thus-gone ones harbor no such thing.
Instead, they show that mental constructs 
Are characterized by arising and ceasing. {6.29}
“The thus-gone ones have discovered the path of suchness based on discriminating all forms, letters, and words. A thus-gone one, O sister, is not in conflict with suchness. Rather, he is one with it, being the same as space, which, like him, is characterized by the absence of mental imputations and the cessation of the three predispositions. Just as space has no ideas or concepts with regard to the predispositions, so also a thus-gone one  does not cogitate {TK183} about sensual enjoyments, form ideas or concepts about them, dwell on them, or get attached to them. He thus does not conceptualize about or falsely identify beings, a vital principle, an individual soul, a person, aggregates, elements, or sense bases. Why then do you, sister, ruminate about the body of the Thus-Gone One?”
“You should consider things carefully, O lord of gods, before you say them,” counseled the thus-gone Amitāyus, “otherwise you may incur undesirable results lasting a long period of time. In this case, this truly great person has performed great service to many buddhas and has cultivated his roots of virtue in the presence of the blessed buddhas. He magically transformed himself into a well-adorned woman in order to worship the Thus-Gone One, so do not address him as a woman.”
The śakra Śikhindhara then said to the brahmā Bhūteśvara, “Show your compassion for me and forgive me, O noble son! May I not incur the undesirable results that the thus-gone Amitāyus has spoken of.” {K142}
Now the bodhisattva Kautūhalika inquired, “O Blessed One, had the śakra Śikhindhara not confessed his words, what kind of ripened result would he have incurred?”
“Noble son,” replied the thus-gone Amitāyus, “if he had not confessed, he would have been reborn eighty-four thousand times as a woman completely suffused with sensuality. Therefore, one should guard one’s speech. The maṇḍala of sound that conveys words, O noble son, has now been made available to you through the blessing of the thus-gone ones. Express your eloquence.”
Bhūteśvara, the brahmā, now with the blessing {TK184} of the buddhas, directed his gaze in each of the ten directions and beseeched with folded hands, “Listen to me, O blessed buddhas, bodhisattva  great beings, great hearers, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas! Grant your approval that my wish may come true, namely that this Dharma method will endure for a long time and that no harm will come to the Dharma teachers and students who are established in the proper conduct. Grant your approval that, during the degenerate time, no māras . . . or human and nonhuman beings will be able to do any harm to them.”
At this point, the brahmā Bhūteśvara, in order to restrain and reverse their aggressive intentions and take the pledge from the evil-minded beings, uttered a loud cry that filled the entire world sphere, and the lords of brahmās declared in one voice, {K143} “We too offer our support for the dhāraṇī. We will ourselves uphold and teach it during the degenerate period. We will protect the sacred Dharma and also protect the Dharma teachers and students that follow the proper conduct. Please recite it, honorable one! We declare our support for this dhāraṇī in front of the blessed buddhas, the bodhisattva great beings, and the great hearers.”
Bhūteśvara, the brahmā, again beseeched, “Give me your blessing, O holy buddhas, bodhisattva great beings, and great hearers! The dhāraṇī is:
amale vimale gaṇaṣaṇḍe hāre {TK185} caṇḍe mahā­caṇḍe came mahā­came some sthāme abaha vibaha aṃgajā netrakhave mūlaparicchede yakṣa­caṇḍe piśāca­caṇḍe āvartani saṃvartani saṃkāraṇi jaṃbhani mohani ucchāṭani hamaha maha maha maha ākuṃcane khagaśava amala mūla mūla­parivartate  asārakhava svāhā! {K144}
“Whoever transgresses against these mantras
Will be excluded from the community—
He will have his eyes taken out, his head will burst, 
And he will have his limbs broken. {6.30}
“As sealed in the formula:
acca avaha cacacu krakṣa cacaṭa kacacā nakhaga caca caca caca na ca hamūla caca camūla cacaha amūla caca {TK186} hamūla mū baḍabahā svāhā!”
Immediately, all the brahmā lords . . . and piśācas applauded and said, “These mantra words possess in excess the ability to crush the great trichiliocosm with their force and power. This noose will affix itself to all spirits who harbor ill will, so how could they survive?”
Bhūteśvara the brahmā said, “Those spirits who have wicked minds; who are devoid of compassion and ungrateful; who wish to harass beings or are followers of Māra; who seek opportunities to harm the head-anointed kṣatriya kings that have faith in the Buddha’s teaching; who approach, seeking an opportunity to harm, the chief queens, royal sons and daughters, women of the harem, ministers, military commanders, or other members of the royal court that have faith in the Buddha’s teaching; who approach, seeking an opportunity to harm, the men and women, sons and daughters, male and female lay practitioners, Dharma teachers and students, monks and nuns, practitioners who engage in meditation and recitation of prayers {K145} or in the service of their superiors—if any such spirits should disturb the aforementioned even for a single moment of mental activity or disturb, harm, or remove even a single hair from their bodies; or if they should steal their vital energy or even breathe upon them; or if they should thus seek, their minds full of malice, an opportunity to cause harm, such māras . . . and human and nonhuman beings, with their bodies rotting and smelly, will have their heads burst into seven pieces, eyes gouged out, and hearts desiccated. They will contract leprosy, oozing pus and stinking, and will completely lose their magical power.  The earth will develop crevasses {TK187} beneath them, which they will fall into. The winds will toss them in the four directions, and they will wander aimlessly, with their bodies covered in dust, mentally disturbed. Those who roam the earth will plunge into the crevasses in the ground eighty-four thousand leagues below the surface and will spend the remainder of their lives there. Aquatic beings that are wicked, have no faith in the teachings of the Buddha, and do harm to the kṣatriya kings who do have this faith, . . . or to those who engage in the service of their superiors—they also will have their heads burst into seven pieces . . . and will spend the remainder of their lives there, should they transgress against these mantras.
“Furthermore, in whatever realm this Dharma discourse—the dhāraṇī-seal that cannot be conquered by the hosts of Māra—is disseminated, there we will {K146} eagerly apply ourselves to the cause of guarding, protecting, and preserving that realm, and we will protect all the beings there who yearn for the Dharma. We shall expel all, from hostile yakṣas to hostile kaṭapūtanas; avert the discord, quarrels, famine, invasions by foreign powers, and the unseasonable rains, storms, cold and hot spells, and disease in that land; ensure the happiness, social harmony, good harvests, and all that accords with roots of virtue; and ensure the health, renown, material gain, and honor of the teachers and students of the Dharma.”
Also at that moment, a bodhisattva great being known as Voice of Mahābrahmā, who dwelled on the tenth bhūmi, was present. He was attended by all the brahmās, māras, śakras, and so forth, {TK188} as well as Vaiśravaṇa, Virūḍhaka, Virūpākṣa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Maheśvara,  Nārāyaṇa, and the lords of the gods and asuras. He had the finest and most radiant complexion and the most exquisite ornamentation. In the guise of a woman, with female characteristics and deportment, he was seated before the thus-gone Śākyamuni. As an act of venerating the blessed buddhas, he proffered a wish-fulfilling jewel in his hands. The bodhisattva great being Voice of Mahābrahmā stared at the thus-gone Śākyamuni with unblinking eyes. He stared at him like he was the only thing in existence—something indescribable and unidentifiable.
The thus-gone Śākyamuni then asked Voice of Mahābrahmā, “Listen, why are you staring at me with unblinking eyes, as if I were the only thing in existence—something indescribable and unidentifiable? Is there any phenomenon that can be called ‘a buddha’ or ‘unidentifiable’? Likewise, the verbal elements in the statement ‘the afflictions of attachment, aggression, or delusion exist’ are merely conditional characteristics. The condition for such characteristics is ignorance. Due to the condition of ignorance, formations proliferate until cessation.”
“Blessed One,” responded Voice of Mahābrahmā, “if all these do not exist, why do you speak to me of ignorance? Blessed One, if there were no ignorance, from what would the twelve links of existence arise? Can we say they come from space {TK189} when space itself does not exist?”
“Noble son, that is correct,” answered the Blessed One, “for all the qualities of buddhahood are like space. Just as space is immaterial, is without characteristics, is neither darkness nor light, is neither thought nor concept, cannot be created or described, is unidentifiable, has no component parts, and has nothing to do with entities, likewise, O noble son, the qualities of buddhahood are  deemed to be the ultimate reality because they are suchness. Because they involve no increase or decrease, the qualities of buddhahood are neither high nor low. Because they have no component parts, the qualities of buddhahood are indescribable. Because they do not move and cannot be placed anywhere, the qualities of buddhahood are not material or entities, and they have no characteristics. Because they transcend verbal description, the qualities of buddhahood are not superimposed, for it is from false conceptualization that the links of existence arise.”
When he gave this teaching, eighty-four thousand beings developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening. 
Then Māra, the evil one, demanded, “If the qualities of buddhahood are indescribable non-entities, like space, then why do you harm me in this way—oppressing me with wisdom, diligence, means, and courage? Why do you destroy my Māra domain? Why do you lead beings from my Māra domain? Why do you instruct them in the nature of illusion, which neither comes nor goes nor is identifiable in any way? When you guide beings in these trainings, no conduct that produces the afflictions can be seen in them. {TK190} For what reason are you assembling all these countless, infinite blessed buddhas, bodhisattva great beings, great hearers, great brahmās, śakras, four world protectors, maheśvaras, and gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas who have magical might and power, thus filling all the buddha fields, to go against me? Anyone who hears of this cruel act will be immediately struck with a splitting headache; their bodies will decompose  and begin to stink. Such is the mantra that you have spoken.”
At that moment, sixty-eight thousand māras, a countless infinitude of their retainers, and all the hostile yakṣas, rākṣasas, kumbhāṇḍas, and piśācas all declared with one voice, “As soon as we heard it, we too got headaches. Our bodies started decomposing, began to stink, and we suffered terribly.”
“Evil ones, remember what happened in the past!” countered the thus-gone Śākyamuni. “When I was sitting at the seat of awakening, you filled the area and the sky around me out to eighty leagues with the hordes of Māra, intent on killing me. And since that time you still send billions of māras and their retainers to kill me. Therefore, I have amassed a countless infinitude of blessed buddhas, bodhisattvas, and so forth, as well as human and nonhuman beings, in order to tame, pacify, and end your torment. I have done so in order to tame, pacify, and end all the suffering of other māras, and so forth, as well as human and nonhuman beings. I have done this to instruct them in the nature of illusion, which neither comes nor goes nor is identifiable in any way. I have done so to dry up the river of saṃsāra in which all beings die and are reborn, and to help them reach the expanse of nirvāṇa without any remainder of the aggregates. {TK191}
“Evil ones, you should develop the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening right now! If you do so, you will immediately be freed from this unbearably painful headache, and ultimately you will actualize the qualities of buddhahood, which have the nature of space. You will even gain the superior domain of the buddhas, which far exceeds that of the māras.”
The sixty-four thousand māras, the countless infinitude of their retainers, and the hostile yakṣas, and so forth, as well as the hostile kaṭapūtanas, all declared with one voice,  “When we develop the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening, we shall actualize the qualities of buddhahood, which have the nature of space, and win the domain of the buddhas as well, superior above all.”
“Even if I were to have a headache until the end of time,” insisted Māra, the evil one, “I would never let such cunning make me develop the mind directed toward awakening.”
Voice of Mahābrahmā then declared, “I will also joyfully uphold all the Dharma teachings that have been taught before all the blessed buddhas here in this buddha field. I will uphold the teachings of the thus-gone Śākyamuni in this buddha field rife with the five degenerations, holding them as the most important. I will make this teaching—this Dharma method—shine until Śākyamuni’s own sun sets. I will bring the Dharma discourse of this dhāraṇī, which cannot be defeated by the hosts of Māra, {TK192} to all lands where it has not previously spread. And wherever it appears, I will ensure that it flourishes. I will defend all the noble sons and daughters in all the towns, villages, cities, and countries. I will protect them. I will turn away all harm. I will lead them to virtue and what is meaningful. 
“Wherever the Dharma discourse of this dhāraṇī, which cannot be defeated by the hosts of Māra, is at least written down, or where there is a lion throne set for Dharma teachers who desire to teach it authentically, people should recite the following mantra at the outset. This mantra will summon me, and I will come to that place with my retinue. We will defend and safeguard those Dharma teachers and students. The mantra is:
avame avame amavare amavare parikuñja nāḍa nāḍa puśkaravahā  jalukha makhaya ili mili kili mili kīrticara mudre mudra­mukhe svāhā!
“Blessed One, Dharma teachers everywhere should remember this mantra at the start of their teachings. If I hear them with my divine ears of incredible purity and fail to come, I will have deceived all the thus-gone ones of the past, present, and future, and may I therefore not fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. Therefore, Blessed One, I will go there and place {TK193} the feet of those Dharma teachers at the crown of my head. Because the eloquence of those Dharma teachers is fitting, I will support them. I will dispel all the sicknesses of those Dharma teachers and students. I will dispel their bad views and actions and all their doubts. Blessed One, wherever this Dharma teaching is taught, upheld, or mastered, I will travel there with my retinue and quell all discord, quarrels, famine, disease, fears, invasion by foreign powers, drought, unseasonable winds, heatwaves, and bad views and actions, as well as all fear of humans, nonhumans, and charnel grounds. Then I will dispel all that is inauspicious, bad dreams, evil omens, hostility, cruelty, meanness, bad tastes, snow, heat, foul odors, and things that are unpleasant to touch and poisonous. I will dispel the harm caused by heat and famine. I will dispel the fear of elephants, lions, tigers, buffaloes, wolves, poisonous snakes, thieves, rogues, humans, and nonhumans. There I will amass all sorts of wealth, grain, herbs, flowers, fruits, juices,  food, drink, clothing, and bedding for the beings’ use and enjoyment. In whatever land this Dharma teaching is held, upheld, read, mastered, or taught, there we will dispel violence toward each individual being. I will bring about what is beneficial, pleasant, and mentally satisfying for the beings’ use and enjoyment. {TK194} I will encourage beings to also desire the Dharma and engage in virtuous actions. I make these aspirations before all the blessed buddhas! All of you blessed buddhas, please be compassionate toward me! May the blessed buddhas bestow the mastery that functions to fulfill all that one wishes for in order to realize this power.”
At that moment, Śākyamuni and all the blessed buddhas directed their compassion to Voice of Mahābrahmā and said, “Voice of Mahābrahmā, because of this aspiration you shall obtain the great power to summon śakras, brahmās, all the world protectors, and the other gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and asuras who appreciate the Dharma. We shall give this mantra to Voice of Mahābrahmā.”
Then the blessed buddhas made the aspiration, “May accomplishment come to Voice of Mahābrahmā. The mantra is:
camuṇḍe muṇḍa­parichede ha mūha ha mūha saṃra­kṣavala kṛṣṇa­mikha parivaha camarayatha ca suvikha amuhula parichede sarva­buddhādhiṣṭhite svāhā!” {TK195}
The thus-gone Śākyamuni said, “Noble son,  this dhāraṇī can summon and inspire all māras, śakras, brahmās, and world protectors, as well as the other gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, and human and nonhuman beings of great splendor. It is upheld and blessed by all the buddhas. Due to its blessings you will be able to master such great powers.”
“Blessed One,” replied Voice of Mahābrahmā, “I will guard this Dharma method in the guise of a woman. I will also protect women. Blessed One, should a woman desire sons, I will fulfill her wishes if she upholds this Dharma teaching by keeping it, reading it, mastering it, or writing it down. In that way any woman can be protected, for if she holds, reads, . . . or listens to this Dharma teaching then, even if she experiences desire, she will not be attached to the womb. When a woman who is free from all negative and apprehensive conduct and behavior reads this Dharma teaching, all her wishes will be fulfilled, and she will be filled with all forms of abundant happiness. I offer these two precious gems to all the blessed buddhas in order to guard this Dharma teaching and fulfill the wishes of all.”
“Noble son, thus it is,” responded the Blessed One. “You will thus guard and protect it.” {TK196}
This concludes the chapter on the dhāraṇīs, the sixth in the “Ratnaketu” section of the Great Collection. {TK197}
Chapter 7
At that time, a bodhisattva great being called Discriminating Intellect was seated before the blessed, thus-gone  Glorious and Brilliantly Shining Jewel, not far from the blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni. For a short time he was in the guise of Brahmā, before instantaneously appearing in the form of Māra. He likewise briefly appeared in the forms of Śakra, as well as a lord of the gods in the heavens of Making Use of Others’ Emanations, Delighting in Emanations, Tuṣita, Free from Strife, and the Four Great Kings, as well as in the form of Maheśvara, and also as a yakṣa, an asura, a garuḍa, a kinnara, a mahoraga, a rākṣasa, a preta, a piśāca, a kumbhāṇḍa, a kṣatriya, a brahmin, a vaiśya, a śūdra, a lion, an elephant, a buffalo, and myriad other species of the animal realm. Instantaneously he appeared in the form of a bird, a tree, a mountain, fruit, clothing, bedding, heavy cloth, a vase, ornaments, jewelry, medicinal herbs, and a jewel. Instantaneously he also appeared in the form of a monk, a nun, and a buddha. Instantaneously he appeared in eighty-four different colors, characteristics, shapes, and forms.
Then Pūrṇa, the son of Maitrāyaṇī, asked the thus-gone Śākyamuni, “Blessed One, what is the cause and what are the conditions {TK198} of this noble son shifting his appearance among eighty-four different colors, characteristics, shapes, and forms?”
“Venerable Pūrṇa, this noble son has incredibly great power,” responded the Blessed One. “The bodhisattva great being Discriminating Intellect matures beings while abiding by the power of his pledge. With the unobscured eyes of insight, in countless infinite buddha fields throughout the ten directions, both pure and impure, he can see beings and their kinds of thoughts, intentions, actions, and illnesses and where  they go for refuge. Abiding in this type of absorption, he adopted forms ranging from bodhisattvas to buddhas as well as colors, characteristics, actions, shapes, and forms as was necessary to guide beings and establish them at the point where they will not revert from the three vehicles. To ensure that beings who are overwhelmed by their desire, hankering after all kinds of possessions and enjoyments, could eliminate their attachment, he gave them possessions and established them at the point of irreversibility. He distributed medicine to those who were afflicted with illness and desired a cure, and he established them at the point of irreversibility. The bodhisattva Discriminating Intellect freed beings as numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā in a single day. This power of his pledge to establish {TK199} them at the point where they will not revert from the three vehicles is not the domain of the hearers or solitary buddhas. They do not reach this far.”
“Blessed One, how long has this noble son exercised this great power for the sake of bringing beings to maturity?” asked Pūrṇa.
“This noble son developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening in the furthest reaches of eons past,” answered the Blessed One. “It was countless eons ago—as many as there are particles of dust in all the buddha fields. By now, sixty-four immeasurable eons have passed since the eon when that bodhisattva Discriminating Intellect began exercising this power by means of the strength of his absorption.”
 “How long will it be until he fully awakens to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood?” Pūrṇa asked.
The Blessed One answered, “After two million six hundred thousand great eons have passed, in a great eon called Liberation, there will be a buddha field called Heart of the Jewel.  There the lifespan of beings will be forty thousand years. He will fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood among beings {TK200} who are inclined toward acts ranging from those of immediate retribution up until the ten nonvirtuous actions. He will be known as the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Light of the Limitlessly Blossoming Flower. He will perform all the deeds of a buddha without exception for forty thousand years. He will mature beings in the three vehicles so that they may reach parinirvāṇa, following which he himself will enter parinirvāṇa in the expanse of nirvāṇa without the remainder of the aggregates.”
Pūrṇa then asked, “From where do this sublime being’s deeds that mature beings manifest?”
“This great being’s aspirations are without bias,” answered the Blessed One. “He made this aspiration: ‘The blessed buddhas clearly see as many buddha fields as there are particles of dust in all the buddha fields in each of the ten directions. Therefore, I too will not fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood until I see those beings that I, while I previously practiced awakened conduct, caused to initially arouse the mind set on unsurpassed and perfect awakening, {TK201} take hold of it, practice the six perfections, and fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood in buddha fields in each of the ten directions. Through this type of power, based on absorption, may all beings in all buddha fields—as many as there are atoms in all the buddha fields in each of the ten directions—and in any other realm  who are inclined toward acts ranging from those of immediate retribution and doubt up until the ten nonvirtuous actions, be reborn in my buddha field after they pass away. Then, may I always use this great power to manifest as a bodhisattva in order to arouse roots of virtue in these beings, establish each of them at the level of irreversibility, and ensure that they fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.’ ”
Then the bodhisattvas who had congregated from buddha fields in the ten directions {TK202} said, “Those bodhisattvas who have come to this buddha field have gladdened such teachers. Seeing this great assembly of bodhisattvas endowed with great compassion, we have received an excellent and unprecedented opportunity to receive the blessings of the blessed buddhas of the past, present, and future. Thus, we received this Dharma method, this exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility. How fortunate we are!”
This concludes the chapter on upholding the sacred Dharma, the seventh in the “Ratnaketu” section of the Great Collection. {TK203}
Chapter 8
At that time, the thus-gone Akṣobhya addressed the entire assembly: “Noble children, all of you śakras, brahmās, world protectors, and lords of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, and so forth, as well as human and nonhuman beings, who have arrived here out of faith in the buddhas’ teaching—I will uplift you! It is rare to find such a congregation of the blessed buddhas, bodhisattva great beings, śakras,  brahmās, world protectors, and lords of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and so forth, as well as human and nonhuman beings! Therefore, now that you have seen this, may those of you who are happy to sustain this sacred Dharma—this Dharma method—and propagate the lineage of the Three Jewels in the future in this buddha field each make an aspiration before the Blessed One.” {TK204}
At that time a māra named Flower Mendicant filled a bucket made of the seven precious substances to the brim with flowers, fruits, crops, and sprouts and transformed himself into a buxom lady with a fine complexion. Dressed in women’s clothing and adorned with fine jewelry, the māra said, “All of you blessed buddhas who have come to this buddha field and now abide within it, and all the rest of you who have gathered here, please give me your attention! As I offer this wide cauldron filled to the brim with all manner of flowers, fruits, crops, and sprouts to all the blessed buddhas, out of compassion for all beings please accept this bucket filled with all manner of flowers, fruits, crops, and sprouts. In this way I will then become a female benefactor in every buddha field without exception throughout the entire Fortunate Eon, one who provides others with food, drink, fruits, and flowers. {TK205} I will bring them to maturity too. Through this ripening of merit, I will complete the six perfections and fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. The beings I train will never lack supplies,  and I will serve them well. Toward that end, please bestow, right now, the accomplishment that fulfills my wishes.”
Then all the blessed buddhas said, “Sublime being, it is excellent that, out of such faith, you have performed such an excellent and lofty act of generosity and venerated all the buddhas. We accept your cauldron filled with flowers and fruits. You shall find all the flowers, fruits, grains, or crops that you wish for. Simply by bringing your wish to mind, it will be fulfilled. May you possess an abundance of flowers, fruits, and grains. May you have abundant wealth.” {TK206}
The māra Flower Mendicant spoke again: “Whether in villages, towns, cities, or border towns, I will be anywhere this dhāraṇī, which the hosts of Māra cannot defeat, is held, taught, explained, or written down. I will ensure the success of everything from the flowers and fruits of their trees to their grain and harvests. I will satisfy all the beings who desire flowers and fruits in those places. Therefore, blessed ones, except in the case of active violence, if there comes a time when there is a being in such a place who dies for want of the flowers and fruits that they desired, then I have deceived all the blessed buddhas in the three times and this great assembly. In that case, may I not fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. 
“Any being there who desires flowers and fruits will be the cause of my completing the perfection of generosity. Blessed ones, having desired flowers and fruits, should any of those beings have an altruistic, amiable, or compassionate attitude toward one another, that will be the cause of my completing the perfections of discipline {TK207} and patience. Should any of them come to practice diligence, having desired flowers and fruits, that will be the cause of my completing the perfection of diligence. If they develop the perception that the mind and mental states are impermanent, that will be the cause of my completing the perfection of concentration. If, having desired flowers and fruits, even birds or wild animals should come to desire the Dharma and abide in emptiness, that will be the cause of my completing the perfection of insight. Moreover, wherever this Dharma teaching spreads, I will assiduously grant everyone whatever crop they desire, be it fruit, wheat, barley, sesame, white lentils, black lentils, peas, horse gram, red lentils, or beans. I will fill all treasuries and granaries with all kinds of grains and harvests. Should even birds or wild animals desire anything, that will be the cause of my completing the perfection of insight. I will ensure there is plenty of sugarcane, grapes, and pomegranate plants there. I will fill all the beings’ pots, vases, and ladles. {TK208} When even birds or wild animals desire something, that will be the cause of my completing the perfections up to insight.  Having completed the six perfections in this manner, I will fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. All of you blessed buddhas and bodhisattva great beings, I request you to take delight in this, my bodhisattva conduct.”
The blessed buddhas expressed their approval by remaining silent. The thus-gone Jñānaketu then declared, “Sublime being, you will be able to enact this great power. Sublime being, do look after all beings with that kind of strength, diligence, enthusiasm, and gentleness.”
When the māra Flower Mendicant heard this encouragement from the thus-gone Jñānaketu, he said, “Blessed buddhas, please give me your attention. I will not dwell where this Dharma teaching is not practiced, but only wherever it is practiced. {TK209} I will ensure that all the grain, herbs, fruits, and flowers that exist in that place are resplendent, bountiful, plentiful, delicious, and colorful, so that people may savor them and enjoy them. I will satisfy people there with food and drink. I will fill their treasuries, granaries, pots, vases, and ladles. Should even the birds or wild animals desire something, that will be the cause of my completing the perfection of insight. I will satisfy the beings here in this buddha field for a thousand eons with food and drink. Likewise, I will perform this great power for a thousand eons in each and every one of the infinite, countless buddha fields, as numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā, that are afflicted  and ripe with the five degenerations. Then, as I fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood, all my deeds shall be perfected. Please bestow upon me this accomplishment. Blessed ones, the following mantra {TK210} effects summoning according to one’s personal aspiration:
camekha camekha camekha vivritahate vaha vaha vaha smara asmarakān sarate vivavasave sara sara indre sara mahīndre sara vajrendre tara vajrendre tarapaya asmakan hu hu hu hu hu hu asaṅgajave ta kha kha vayuvahe upanaya santarpaya vijaphala­puṣpa oṣadhi dhana­dhanyena­candra akṣaye jalavahane smara asmarakan samyak pratipanna­payasaṭatakāli yama me mam imam edacavara svāhā! 
“Blessed ones, may I abide wherever this Dharma teaching and mantra are spoken, in order to bring beings to maturity and perfect my bodhisattva conduct.” {TK211}
The blessed buddhas all expressed their approval to him. All the bodhisattva great beings, Māra and his entire retinue, the śakras, the brahmās, and all the world protectors, as well as all the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, kumbhāṇḍas, piśācas, and human and nonhuman beings in this buddha field expressed their approval with one voice, saying, “Sublime being, it is excellent that you bring beings to maturity in the form of a woman and engage in the six perfections. May we all achieve this kind of power through our own merit,  diligence, strengths, and bravery!”
The thus-gone Śākyamuni then said, “May you be joyful supporters who assist this sublime being.”
The entirety of the māra Flower Mendicant’s retinue then declared with one voice, {TK212} “For this purpose, we will be this being’s followers, associates, and harmonious assistants. Sublime being, when you fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood, please bestow prophecies of our attaining unsurpassed and perfect awakening.”
“Friends, may this come to be!” agreed the māra Flower Mendicant. “When a being plants a seed in the earth and enjoys its flowers, fruit, and fragrance, may this bring us happiness and benefit!”
The māra Flower Mendicant then addressed the thus-gone Śākyamuni: “I will uphold your teachings and spread your Dharma methods. First and foremost, I will assiduously apply myself to eradicating all calamities involving famine. Blessed One, please bestow a prophecy of unsurpassed and perfect awakening upon me.”
The māra Flower Mendicant then bowed to the thus-gone Śākyamuni, touching the five points of his body to the ground, and sat to one side. The thus-gone Śākyamuni then said to him:
“Heroic heir of the well-gone ones, O lotus face, stand!
You have today made the essential aspiration to supreme awakening.
Arousing your compassion, sole kinsman, you will liberate beings tormented {TK213}
By the suffering of hunger, and then you will accomplish buddhahood. {8.1}
The nature of phenomena is that they are immaculate, just like space.
They are emptiness and utterly transcend the domains of signs and wishes.
Realizing this,  you will soon become a buddha called Splendor—
A wise being who tames all enemies in this buddha field with his vast teaching.” {8.2}
Extremely pleased and delighted, the māra Flower Mendicant cast a variety of flowers toward the blessed ones. 
At that time, the bodhisattva great being Siddhimati rose from his seat. Joining his palms, he spoke in a clear voice to the blessed buddhas in this buddha field: “Blessed buddhas, please give me your attention! Once, at the beginning of the Fortunate Eon, I made an aspiration before the thus-gone Krakucchanda so as to be able to bring beings to maturity. In a female form, I extracted the nectar of the earth by searching among herbs and roots in order to heal the four hundred and four illnesses. {TK214} Thus, in order to make beings happy and free from illness, I demonstrated how to prepare one thousand and four sets of medicinal treatments. These included four hundred and four medicinal extracts, four hundred and four herbal medicines, four hundred and four medicines made from fruits, four hundred and four applications made from butter, four hundred and four applications made from seed oil, four hundred and four cleansing treatments, four hundred and four medicines known as ‘good health,’ and so forth, as well as treatments ingested in the form of powders, pills, and aromas. In order to bring beings to maturity, heal their illnesses, and benefit them, I acted in various functions as the thus-gone Krakucchanda’s attendant, serving him, and from him sought a prophecy of unsurpassed and perfect awakening. 
“The thus-gone Krakucchanda then declared to me, ‘In the future, when beings’ lifespan is a hundred years, there will be one called Śākyamuni who will be called a blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha.  From the previous aspirations of this thus-gone one, a great gathering of buddhas and bodhisattvas will manifest. Then you will receive a prophecy of unsurpassed and perfect awakening.’ Later, this was mentioned by the thus-gone Kanakamuni and then by the thus-gone Kāśyapa as well. 
“And so I aspired, ‘At that time, may I {TK215} become a great healer, a god who can extract for sick beings the essences in this buddha field for great eons as numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā. There I will also take up the vast essence of the earth, seeking among the various grasses, roots, leaves, petals, flowers, and fruits to heal the diseases of beings and be of use to them. Then, whenever a person who has prepared these medicines comes to understand that the mind and all mental states are impermanent, suffering, empty, and selfless, may this be the cause for my completing the perfection of insight. To the degree that I manifest this great power in this buddha field, may I, in a female form, ripen and serve diseased beings in worlds throughout the ten directions as numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā, for as many eons as there are grains of sand in the Gaṅgā, with great enthusiasm, strength, diligence, and gentleness. Through this may I awaken fully and completely to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.’ {TK216}
“Even now, I strengthen my aspiration before the blessed buddhas. May I be the assistant of the greatly fortunate, victorious, and reliable Flower Mendicant.  We will both bring beings to maturity while in the guise of female forms bearing the same complexion. We will ripen women. Blessed ones, furthermore, for the sake of healing the diseases of the old and sick, the two of us will prepare food and drink replete with color, scent, and taste extracted from the essence of the earth. In doing so, may that become a cause for us to complete all the perfections up to insight.
“So, when I ask whether I will fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood, I implore you blessed buddhas to give your assent. Blessed buddhas, please bestow a prophecy of unsurpassed and perfect awakening upon me.”
The blessed buddhas then said, “Good, good, O sublime being.”
The thus-gone Śākyamuni then declared: {TK217}
“You are the sole doctor for the ailing world
Who, further, delights all lords.
In the sublime and pure field called Lotus
You will become the victor Vairocana.” {8.3}
The bodhisattva great being Earth Holder also desired a prophecy. In a female form, he made the aspiration to be able to bring beings to maturity by employing earth and the thus-gone Śākyamuni said to him:
“You are the sole supporter of the mountains and earth.
May your hopes be quickly fulfilled.
In the rich and supreme field Victorious
You will become the victor Lord of Wisdom.” {8.4}
Likewise, the bodhisattva Supreme Wisdom also desired a prophecy. Taking a female form, he made the aspiration to be able to bring beings to maturity by employing water and the Blessed One said to him as well: 
“You have satisfied beings here with fruits and flowers
Through your skill and insight.
In the supreme and pure field Doorway
You will become the victor Supreme Sun of Bliss.” {8.5} {TK218}
Likewise, the bodhisattva Demonstrator of Consequences also desired a prophecy. Taking a female form, he made the aspiration to be able to bring beings to maturity by employing fire. The Blessed One said to him as well:
“Perceiving beings as impermanent,
You matured beings to reach awakening.
O disciplined being, in the supreme field Highly Extolled
You will become the well-gone one Lamp of Fire.” {8.6}
Likewise, the bodhisattva Immaculately Moved by Beings also desired a prophecy. Taking a female form, he made the aspiration to be able to bring beings to maturity by employing wind. The Blessed One said to him as well:
“In movement, you will bring bliss to beings,
Totally pacifying their afflictions.
In the field of Purity you will see the meaning of sameness
And become the victor Candraprabha.” {8.7}
Likewise, the bodhisattva Unobscured Lamp also desired a prophecy. Taking a female form, he made the aspiration to be able to bring beings to maturity by employing space. {TK219} The Blessed One said to him as well:
“Teacher of nonabiding wisdom, beyond anguish;
Preacher of what is meaningful—the supreme and authentic path of awakening—
In the field called Unimpeded Remover of Obscurations
You will become the victor Supreme Wisdom.” {8.8}
Likewise, the bodhisattva Supreme Scent-Perfused Preacher also desired a prophecy. Taking a female form, he made the aspiration to be able to bring beings to maturity by employing flowers.  The Blessed One said to him as well:
“By venerating with flowers of the sweetest fragrance
The buddhas who teach the supreme path,
In the supreme field Source of Flowers
You will become the well-gone one Totally Fragrant.” {8.9}
Likewise, the bodhisattva Saffron Color also desired a prophecy. Taking a female form, he made the aspiration to be able to bring beings to maturity by employing various colors. The Blessed One said to him as well: {TK220}
“Dressing the world in saffron,
You fashion it to the delight of the lineage of the Three Jewels.
In the supreme buddha field Blue Light
You will become well-gone one Precious Light.” {8.10}
Likewise, various gods of seeds, forests, fruits, and so forth, all the way up to sixty-seven trillion bodhisattvas, also desired to receive prophecies. All of them made aspiration prayers to reach unsurpassed and perfect awakening in order to bring beings to maturity while in female form and to be able to ripen women. Why was this? It is because it is very easy for someone who has male genitalia to acquire female genitalia, whereas it is very difficult for someone who has female genitalia to acquire male genitalia. They each individually received a verse of prophecy.
At that time, billions of gods and great nāgas also desired prophecies. They aspired to awakening, and each individually received a verse of prophecy. Likewise, sixty-four quintillion eight hundred million asuras, seventy septillion female gods and humans, and ninety-nine novillion māras and their retinues, as well as humans and nonhumans  {TK221} including brahmins, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, śūdras, men, women, boys, and girls, all as numerous as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā, desired to receive a prophecy of unsurpassed and perfect awakening. They each individually received a verse of prophecy. Moreover, a countless infinitude of humans and nonhumans, and likewise gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, pretas, and piśācas that had not previously generated the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening, developed it. Countless beings came to abide at the stage of irreversibility. Countless beings achieved the various absorptions, acceptances, and dhāraṇīs of bodhisattvas. Countless beings achieved the result, were freed from desire, and exhausted their defilements. Countless beings aroused their minds away from the vehicles of the hearers and solitary buddhas and came to abide on the stage of irreversibility within buddhahood itself.
All of these beings then declared with one voice, “We all will uphold this sacred Dharma just as the blessed buddhas have commanded. Whoever retains this Dharma teaching, commits it to writing, {TK222} or upholds it, we shall use our skills to sustain that person.”
This concludes the chapter on prophecy, the eighth in the “Ratnaketu” section of the Great Collection. {TK223}
Chapter 9
The blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni then said, “O all you  blessed buddhas who have come here to this buddha field motivated by compassion to engage in discussion, please give these beings your attention. These noble children will satisfy others with clothing, food, drink, medicine, and supplies. They will use the female form to mature others for unsurpassed and perfect awakening. From the moment they developed the mind of awakening in order to mature others, they have been dedicated to emanating and providing clothing, food, drink, medicine, and supplies to fulfill their hopes—no matter what, why, or how these things are desired. These sublime beings will enact this great power and be able to serve beings with what is enjoyable and useful.”
Thereupon, bringing to mind the concordant cause that is adorned by {TK224} great compassion, merit, wisdom, and absorption, the blessed buddhas addressed these sublime beings, saying, “In order to fulfill your wishes and hopes, the blessed buddhas who course through the three times will grant you their blessings and bestow this mantra, which accords with the cause of all roots of virtue. It is:
jyotovava dhriti­vava muni­vava satya­vava sūnya alaṅkara­vava dhyāna­rasa­vava mahā­kāruṇa­vava mahā­prativava amohavava ruti­vava kṣitiv­ava salila­vava khaga­vava baya­vava varta­vava adhiṣṭhāna­vava amavava ahannavava tathāvava bhūta­koṭi­vava nirvriti­vava triyalana­vava traidhātu­kava [va] tri­vimokṣa­vava tri­śūkla­vava raṣṭi adhiṣṭhāna­vava vava vava vava samatrayananyasamatā ṭaṭa ṭaṭa ṭaṭa ṭaṣṭa siddhi­sarva­kula­śala­mula {TK225} adhiṣṭhānaya svāhā!
“Sublime beings, you should take up this mantra of the sameness of all phenomena,  which fulfills all wishes, in order to accomplish the enjoyment, delight, and ripening of beings and the mastery of your awakened conduct.”
At that time, ten thousand bodhisattvas, including Flower Mendicant, Goddess of Glory, the medicine goddess Siddhimati, and the goddess Earth Holder, exerted themselves in female form to accomplish the enjoyment, delight, and ripening of beings. They said together with one voice, “Since this mantra has been spoken by the blessed buddhas in order to fulfill our hopes, we will be able to serve beings by means of this blessing. We will be able to accomplish unsurpassed wisdom. We will joyfully uphold this mantra {TK226} with great zeal in order to bring beings to maturity. Additionally, out of compassion for beings, we will each live by our own pledges that we made before the thus-gone ones. Should any god, nāga and so forth, or human being attempt to extinguish, destroy, or ruin this Dharma method which the thus-gone ones have blessed, then should we then fail to repel them or act assiduously against them so that the sacred Dharma may long remain, we will have deceived all the blessed buddhas who course through the three times. In that case, may we not fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood!
“Friends, should a god and so forth, or a human, harm a monk, nun, layman, or laywoman, if we  do not repel them or exert ourselves to quell the disturbance they are creating, then we will have deceived all the blessed buddhas who course through the three times. In that case, may we not fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood! Blessed ones, should any noble son or daughter who seeks awakening be threatened by fire, {TK227} water, poison, weapons, evil spirits, or infectious diseases that last one, two three, or four days or be threatened by or scared of any gods, nāgas, yakṣas, kaṭapūtanas, kṣatriyas, brahmins, vaiśyas, śūdras, lions, tigers, diseases, hunger, thirst, or harm of any kind, if they recall this dhāraṇī mantra, which fulfills all wishes and is blessed by all the buddhas, and we do not deliver them from such threats—except for those brought on by their own past karmic obscurations—then we will have deceived all the blessed buddhas who course through the three times. In that case, may we not fully awaken to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood!”
At that moment, all the blessed buddhas gathered in this buddha field expressed their approval, saying, “Good, O sublime beings. You have made an excellent promise. Good! You will be able to enact this kind of great power that sublime beings possess.”
The thus-gone Śākyamuni then said to Māra, the evil one:
“Be joyful and faithful regarding these sages who have arrived.
Quickly, today, with joy, arouse the mind of awakening for the welfare of others. 
Evil one, outside your realm you are friendless and powerless,
So make yourself free of fault and do not cause problems for the sages!” {9.1} {TK228}
Māra, the evil one, responded:
“Your words do not arouse even one thought of faith in this immaculate awakening.
O Sage, just remain silent, for I have followers too.
My soldiers and their mounts are gathered in my realm.
For as long as I live, my supreme dominance will leave you powerless.” {9.2}
This concludes the chapter on compassion, the ninth in the “Ratnaketu” section of the Great Collection. {TK229}
Chapter 10
The thus-gone Māndāravagandharoca then addressed the thus-gone Śākyamuni, saying, “In the past, previous thus-gone ones came from their disparate buddha fields and congregated in buddha fields that were afflicted and rife with the five degenerations. They excellently blessed this sacred Dharma method. They defeated billions of māras and gazed upon all beings with the eyes of great love and compassion. They freed them from evil views, lit the lamp of insight, and laid out the peaceful path. They delivered this Dharma discourse, this exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility. Thus they defeated the black faction and planted the banner of the Dharma. In the same way, right now, so many of us blessed buddhas who live and spend our time in the ten directions have assembled in this buddha field filled with the afflictions and the five degenerations out of our concern for others. We have performed acts such as excellently blessing this Dharma method and so forth, as well as planting the banner of the Dharma. However, Śākyamuni,  after your sun has set, who will reign supreme in this buddha field? Who will uphold this sacred Dharma? {TK230} Who will nurture these Dharma methods? Who will bring beings to maturity? Who will be included in this great assembly? Into whose hands shall I entrust this Dharma discourse?”
The thus-gone Śākyamuni answered the thus-gone Māndāravagandharoca, “You can entrust the Dharma discourse of this dhāraṇī-seal to the hands of anyone—whether bodhisattvas who have achieved acceptance, or śakras, brahmās, and world protectors, or lords of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas, or anyone else—as long as they exert themselves in this Dharma method, live in these four central continents, and are clearly faithful toward this Dharma method. It does not matter if they are a śakra, brahmā, world protector, and so forth, including a lord of the mahoragas.”
The thus-gone Māndāravagandharoca then let his unimpeded voice suffuse the entire buddha field, saying, “Friends, everyone who is gathered in this buddha field, please listen! It is incredibly rare that a thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha comes to the world. But it is even more rare that all the blessed buddhas should gather together as one in a single buddha field. Now, however, all these buddhas have gathered out of concern for you, to care for all beings, to bless the methods of the sacred Dharma, {TK231} and to set out the unsurpassed path. {K147} The entirety of the elements of earth, water, fire, wind, and space throughout the three times have been blessed in order to ensure that these methods of the sacred Dharma will continue for a long time, that the lineage of the Three Jewels will not be interrupted, that all beings will be brought to maturity, and so forth, and that the other shore of saṃsāra will be reached.”
All the blessed buddhas who lived in that buddha field then spoke the following words of advice to the bodhisattva great beings, to the beings of great splendor—śakras, brahmās, other world protectors, and the lords of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas—and to the beings who inhabit the world with the four continents. They said, “To your hands especially, friends, we entrust this way of the sacred Dharma, having empowered it to bring all beings to maturity. You should keep this method of the sacred Dharma in mind, glorify it, and protect it, so that the sacred Dharma continues unbroken and does not disappear from this world too soon. {K148} We entrust to the hands of all of you, as is proper, all the noble sons and daughters who have faith, monks and nuns, male and female lay practitioners, all the persons who uphold the sacred Dharma, and those who uphold this Dharma discourse of the Great Collection . . . or write it down, so that you may protect them and care for them. You shall protect . . . and care for the Dharma teachers and students, persons who desire the Dharma and delight in meditation, {TK232} and those who uphold the sacred Dharma.  Why is this? 
“Whichever thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas were in this world in the past, all of these thus-gone ones, having congregated in the buddha field afflicted by the five degenerations, entrusted this Dharma method to the hands of all the protectors of the world, the śakras and the brahmās, so that it was protected and did not disappear, so that the persons who uphold the sacred Dharma were protected . . . and so that all beings could be brought to maturity.
“In the same way, whatever blessed buddhas there will be in the future, throughout the ten directions, they too, having instantaneously assembled in the buddha field afflicted by the five degenerations, will recite the mantra words of this dhāraṇī for the benefit of beings and will consecrate this Dharma method. They will entrust it to the hands of the śakras, brahmās, and other world protectors, so that it is well protected.
“In the same way, we also now entrust especially to your hands—śakras, brahmās, and other world protectors and the lords of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas who inhabit this buddha field and this world consisting of the four continents—this method of the sacred Dharma so that it is protected and brings beings to maturity. You should likewise {K149} keep it in your mind and glorify and protect it, so that it continues unbroken and does not disappear too soon.
“You should protect, honor, and venerate all the noble sons and daughters who have faith—the persons who uphold the sacred Dharma, monks and nuns, and male  and female lay practitioners—who uphold this Dharma discourse of the Great Collection . . . or write it down and preserve it in the form of a book, as well as the Dharma teachers and students who practice meditation {TK233} and uphold the sacred Dharma. Why is this?
“Because this Dharma discourse has been blessed by all the buddhas. In the hamlets, villages, towns, cities, district capitals, state capitals, inhabited forests, . . . or family houses where this Dharma discourse is disseminated, explained, taught, studied, or merely written down and preserved in the form of a book, the elixir of the Dharma will increase the potency of the earth and the vitality of beings.
“By this means you will become full of vitality, energy, strength, diligence, and courage, and your retinues and palaces will thrive. Any king who rules over a populace will obtain protection, his royal might will increase, and his entire kingdom will be protected. Satisfied by this Dharma elixir, the kings of Jambudvīpa will become kindly disposed toward one another. Placing their faith in the ripening of action, they will develop minds full of good qualities; free from envy, benevolent, compassionate toward all beings . . . they will embrace correct views, and each will be content with his respective domain. {K150}
“The whole of Jambudvīpa will prosper, filling up with inhabitants far and wide. It will abound in provisions and will be pleasant to inhabit. The earth will be populated with many people over vast areas and will be fecund, yielding juicy and sweet fruits, leaves, medicinal herbs,  {TK234} crops, and other treasures in abundance. It will afford a healthy and comfortable life. All the discord, quarrels, famine, disease, invasions by foreign powers, stinging insects, venomous snakes, troublesome yakṣas, rākṣasas, deer, birds, wolves, unseasonable rains, and storms will be pacified. Auspicious constellations, nights, days, months, fortnights, seasons, and years will rule.
“The beings, for the most part, will conduct themselves according to the ten virtuous actions. After dying in this world, they will proceed to the blissful forms of existence in the heavens. They will form your retinue. This Dharma discourse of this dhāraṇī thus possesses many qualities and brings much benefit. 
“This Great Collection sūtra has been consecrated by all the buddhas so that beings may reach the far shore of saṃsāra. It will attract increasing and eventually great fame, and it will completely exhaust the action that causes one to experience the condition of being a woman in this life or in future lives. In short, {K151} even if the condition of a woman were experienced in one’s current birth, this already acquired female gender would be completely purified, except in the case of those who have committed any of the five acts of immediate retribution, opposed the sacred Dharma, or reviled a noble one. Whatever other unpleasant results could ripen because of actions committed with the body, speech, or mind, will all be completely purified.
“If one merely writes down this Dharma discourse and preserves it in the form of a book, one’s obscurations that are due to action and afflictions, even if they are as enormous as Mount Meru, will dissipate completely. And all one’s roots of virtue—the bases of support—will grow until fully accomplished. One will be complete and perfect in every limb and  have all one’s wishes come true, and all the good that one does with one’s body, speech, {TK235} and mind will flourish. One will abandon all wrong views and defeat all of one’s enemies in accordance with the Dharma. One will engage in all actions that are peaceful and subtle. All this will occur through the power of this Dharma discourse—this Great Collection dhāraṇī—blessed by all the buddhas.
“The earth in the realm where this Dharma discourse—the Great Collection dhāraṇī—spreads and proliferates will be most kind, full of vitality, and rich in juicy and sweet fruits. It will not produce anything sour, bitter, acerbic, or tasteless. It will abound in flowers and fruit, and the pots and jars in the granaries and storehouses will be brimful of grain and other crops. The beings who will live there will be amply provided with clothing, food, water, medicines, and tools. If they sustain themselves with this water and food, they will be completely free from disease and will be wealthy, beautiful, strong, astute, and intelligent. They will yearn for the Dharma and will delight in wholesome pursuits. They will give up evil ways.
“After they die in this world, they will be reborn as your companions. {K152} With your retinues enhanced by all this, you, powerful with your invincible armies, will protect humankind with its four castes, your strength fueled by the Dharma. You will engage beings in the pursuit of the Dharma, worshiping in this way all the blessed buddhas of the three times.”
At this point, the thus-gone Māndāravagandharoca, filling the entire buddha field with the pure sound  of his special wisdom-voice of a buddha that so aptly conveys the meaning of words, {TK236} exhorted all the bodhisattva great beings, the lords of the śakras, the lords of the brahmās, . . . and the lords of mahoragas who dwell in this buddha field and this world sphere consisting of the four continents, to preserve, teach, and protect the Dharma methods taught in this Great Collection sūtra, thus following the instructions of all the buddhas.
In response, all of the ninety-seven tens of thousands of millions of bodhisattva great beings who dwell in this buddha field and have attained acceptance, led by Maitreya, spoke with a single voice: “We also, following the instructions of all the buddhas, accept, as is proper, our responsibility with regard to this Dharma discourse that has been commended by our supreme guides, as the way to worship the thus-gone ones of the three times and out of respect for our teachers. Acting out of compassion we will, in order to bring beings to maturity . . . and to establish them on the unsurpassable path, glorify this Dharma discourse far and wide—in villages, towns, cities, countries, state capitals, and inhabited forests. We will bring beings to full maturity so that the sacred Dharma continues for a long time.”
All the blessed buddhas in this buddha field applauded, saying, “Good! Good it is, O good people, that you will do this!” {K153}
And the lords of śakras, brahmās, mahoragas, and other beings who were in this buddha field—sixty-four million billion beings of great splendor and majesty—all said with one voice, “To ensure that the sacred Dharma continues for a long time, we will also uphold, . . .  {TK237} teach in full, and glorify this Dharma discourse—the Great Collection dhāraṇī. We will bring beings to full maturity. We will protect and take care of the Dharma students who uphold the sacred Dharma. Wherever this Dharma discourse is practiced, there we will, following the instructions of all the buddhas, pacify all discord, quarrels, wars, famine, disease, invasions by foreign powers, unseasonable cold and hot spells, storms, torrential rains, hurricanes, and anything that tastes foul, unpleasant, sour, bitter, or is tasteless. We will bring about every type of comfort and pleasure and ensure there is an abundance of provisions of every kind. We will make every effort to ensure that the methods of the sacred Dharma continue for a long time. Furthermore, we will protect righteous kings and take care of those who delight in meditation.”
All the blessed buddhas applauded them, saying, “Good! Good it is, O good people, that you will do this! You should exert yourselves for the sake of yourselves as well as others. In this way you will venerate the blessed buddhas of the three times. If you make an effort to bring beings to maturity, to glorify this Dharma method, and to make the sacred Dharma continue for a long time, you will swiftly awaken fully and completely to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.”
Now all the lords of śakras, brahmās, gods, and mahoragas  who live in the central universe consisting of the four continents—all of them of great splendor—rose {K154} from their seats and, standing with folded hands, said, {TK238} “We, too, following the instructions of all the blessed buddhas, will protect this Dharma method and glorify it. We accept, as is proper, our responsibility with regard to this Great Collection sūtra that has been blessed by all the buddhas—this dhāraṇī-seal—this Dharma discourse . . . and will teach it in full in villages, towns, cities, countries, state capitals, and inhabited forests. We will care for and protect those who uphold the sacred Dharma. As for those who are established in the practice of the Dharma—Dharma teachers and students, monks and nuns, male and female lay practitioners, and other noble sons and daughters who have faith, delight in meditation, uphold this Dharma discourse, . . . or write it down and preserve it in the form of a book—we will protect, care for, respect, revere, honor, and worship all of them. We will respectfully present them with robes, parasols, banners, flags, scented oils, . . . and all kinds of medicines and utensils.
“And while this Dharma discourse is being taught and elucidated, we will attend to it to hear it for ourselves. Recognizing it as the supreme teacher, we will respect, revere, honor, and worship this Dharma discourse with parasols, banners, and flags. Why is this? It is because while this Dharma discourse on the dhāraṇī-seal that has been blessed by all the buddhas is being taught, we will be energized by the elixir of the Dharma. Strong,  diligent, mindful, and surrounded by supporters, we will become an invincible army. In this way, {K155} we will quell, in every realm, all discord, quarrels, {TK239} wars, disputes, famine, disease, invasions by foreign powers, unseasonable storms, torrential rains, cold and hot spells, droughts, bad dreams, and bad omens; all the foul, unpleasant, sour, bitter, acerbic, or insipid tastes; and all immoral predilections.
“Moreover, we will provide for every possible comfort, the abundance of provisions and food, enjoyments, and freedom from disease. We will set in motion timely winds, rains, cool and hot weather, and an abundance of water. We will set in motion auspicious constellations, nights, days, months, fortnights, seasons, and years. We will fill the rivers, lakes, ponds, and lotus ponds. In places where beings are troubled by floods, we will stop this calamity. Furthermore, in such places of trouble—villages, towns, cities, and countries—we will procure for the benefit of beings leaves, branches, flowers, fruits, bulbs, grain, herbs, and other crops—all of them plentiful, of prime quality and pleasant appearance, juicy, succulent, and tasty. We will also provision beings with wealth, crops, medicines, clothing, and ornaments, without leaving anything lacking.
“We will ensure the longevity that arises from glory and merit for those beings who engage in wholesome pursuits and will spurn evil ones. In the houses, towns, cities, countries,  or capital cities where this Dharma discourse on dhāraṇī-seals, blessed by all the buddhas, {TK240} is taught in its entirety, written down {K156} and preserved in book form, recited, worshiped, and treated with respect, any head-anointed kṣatriya kings who are living in these places will be protected and cared for by us. We will dispel anything that is harmful to them, and we will procure for them anything that is salutary. We will quell all idle curiosity, inauspiciousness, wrong views, wrong actions, wrong authority, wrong aspirations, wrong refuge, hypocrisy, garrulousness, treachery, deceit, lies, envy, anger, and resentment. We will establish them on the straight path of correct views and inspire them to adhere to faith, self-control, self-restraint, conscientiousness, and decorum.
“In the same way, we will protect, care for, . . . and inspire conscientiousness and decorum in the chief queens, concubines, ministers, and accountants, in the prominent people in the towns and the country, in the four castes, and in women, men, sons, and daughters. We will also, in the same places, give complete protection to all the animals. Wherever this Dharma discourse is explained . . . and written down and preserved in the form of a book, we will thus care for the beings there with great effort and courage. We will strive to glorify this Dharma method and stop it from disappearing.”
All the blessed buddhas applauded these sublime beings, saying, “Good! Good it is, sublime beings, that you will do that,  and that you will strive to prevent this Dharma method and the lineage of the Three Jewels {TK241} from disappearing. In this way you {K157} will worship the blessed buddhas of the three times.”
This concludes the tenth chapter of the “Ratnaketu Sūtra,” about protection. {K158} {TK242}
Chapter 11
Now the blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni addressed Śakra, Brahmā, Virūḍhaka, Virūpākṣa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and Kubera:
“O sublime beings, I have fully realized unsurpassed and perfect awakening in this buddha field, which is afflicted by the five degenerations and lacking in Dharma, through my compassionate dedication to sentient beings. In order to quell the pain of beings thrown into the darkness of ignorance and overwhelmed by the thieves and rogues of the afflictions, I have conquered the faction of Māra, raised the banner of the sacred Dharma, delivered countless beings from suffering, rained showers of the sacred Dharma, and defeated ten million māras.
“O sublime beings, {K159} this Dharma discourse and exposition of the dhāraṇī-seal, including its verbal formula, which is called the terminator of birth based on the essential nature of phenomena in their vajra-like indivisibility,  has been consecrated {TK243} by infinite numbers of blessed buddhas and bodhisattva great beings, impossible to count, who have gathered from the world spheres in the ten directions; it has been consecrated by them to pacify the negativities of beings in this buddha field who depend for life on the earth’s vitality to bring them to maturity, to exhaust all their negative action, to ensure the long continuity of the lineage of the Three Jewels, . . . and to completely fulfill all the buddhas’ intentions. So, too, you should bless it and protect it.
“I entrust you with the responsibility for the formation of merit through the roots of virtue of anyone who protects this sacred Dharma method. Likewise, I entrust you with the responsibility for the formation of merit through the roots of virtue of anyone who imparts the scriptures or recites, memorizes, pronounces, or explains them, goes for refuge in the Three Jewels, maintains lay vows, or observes pure conduct. I also entrust you with the responsibility for the formation of merit in the process that begins with entry into the first concentration and continues until the cultivation of the cessation of perception and sensation, as well as the process that begins with actualizing the fruit of entering the stream and continues until actualizing the awakening of buddhahood. I entrust you with the responsibility for the formation of the roots of virtue of these kinds of accumulations of merit in the present and in the future, as well as the formation of merit that results from shining the lamp of the sacred Dharma. I entrust you with the responsibility for the formation of merit for anyone who strives to propagate the Dharma methods blessed by the thus-gone ones. Anyone in the future who retains, or even writes down, this Dharma in the form of a book and carries it will purify all karmic action through this Dharma discourse. Friends, whether in a town, a home, or another place, should a Dharma preacher bathe, put on new garments, and sit on a lion throne strewn with various flowers, censed with fragrant incense, and covered with fine fabrics and linens to teach this Dharma discourse from the tip of his tongue, or even just write it down and recite it, will you care for the Dharma teacher and student? Will you protect the Dharma students?  {TK244} If you do not go there to exhaust the nonvirtue of both yourselves and others, you will have deceived us and will have become deluded with regard to the development of the path.”
Brahmā, lord of the Sahā world, then made a pledge to the Blessed One, “Now or in the future, as long as this sacred Dharma method still exists, should a Dharma teacher, or a faithful noble son or daughter—whether a monk or a nun, a layman or a laywoman—in any village, town, city, country, border town, capital, temple, forest, palace, brahmin household, merchant household, or common household, first bathe, anoint their body, and put on new garments and then, in a courtyard adorned with various flowers, take a seat on a lion throne that is covered with fine fabrics and linens, censed with fragrant incense, and surrounded by delicious foods and teach this dhāraṇī-seal extensively to others from the tip of their tongue or, alternatively, write it down or read it, if I do not come, surrounded by hundreds of thousands of members of my retinue, to protect that Dharma teacher and clear away the afflicted karmic actions of those Dharma students—both myself and others—and to ripen their virtuous qualities, to nurture this great Dharma method, and set them on the supreme path of the great light of wisdom—if I do not come to care for those villages . . . and common households and fill their treasuries and granaries with wealth and grain, then I will have transgressed the unprecedented vow I took before the blessed buddhas.  {TK245}
“My dhāraṇī is as follows: aṃ guha aṃ guha dhaṅga pura hana yami kha kha kha kha kha kha khava khava klinnakhava svāhā! 
“Blessed One, if I do not come to support and satisfy those Dharma teachers and students with treasuries and granaries of wealth and grain, then I will have transgressed my vow.” 
All the blessed buddhas, bodhisattva great beings, gods, humans, and asuras expressed their approval of Brahmā, lord of the Sahā world.
Then Kauśika repeated Brahmā’s vow and said, “My dhāraṇī is khavam rikha khavam rikha na lagha amudaña amuvaha akaṭaṭa akha aśakha jinavrakhe svāhā! Blessed One, if I do not follow through on my pledge, then I will have transgressed my vows.” Everyone then expressed their approval of Śakra, lord of the gods.
Next Virūḍhaka spoke up as well, repeating the same vow {TK246} before saying, “My dhāraṇī is ukhana­vana vasa­vana samudra­saṅṅidjña tathachyudta varuṇa vavārājā svāhā!” Everyone also expressed their approval of Virūḍhaka, the great king.
Now Virūpākṣa spoke up,  repeating the same vow before saying, “My dhāraṇī is jalaugha atogha amama mogha amasarājana­caryayamuja svāhā!” Everyone expressed their approval of Virūpākṣa, the great king.
Next Dhṛtarāṣṭra spoke up as well, repeating the same vow before saying, “My dhāraṇī is bindu­java khava javara­mukha kṣa sāra {TK247} pukavaha amārgavaṭa svāhā!” Everyone expressed their approval of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the great king.
Then Kubera spoke up as well, repeating the same vow before saying, “My dhāraṇī is kṣutre kṣu kṣu kṣutre kha kṣutre atikṣutre anayana­kṣutre hrīda­kṣutre sagara­hrīda­kṣutre saṃkusu­kṣutre dharma­kṣaya­mutre svāhā!” Everyone also expressed their approval of Kubera, the great king.
After this, twelve hundred great yakṣa commanders who live in this world system of four continents and guard it; forty thousand who live in other four-continent systems; and other gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras,  and mahoragas of great magical power all said with one voice, “Blessed One, now or in the future, as long as this sacred Dharma lamp still shines, should a Dharma teacher, or a faithful noble son or daughter—whether a monk or a nun, a layman or a laywoman—in any village, town, city, country, border town, {TK248} capital, forest, palace, brahmin household, merchant household, aristocratic household, or common household, first bathe, anoint their body, and put on new garments and then, in a courtyard adorned with various flowers and censed with fragrant incense, take a seat on a lion throne that is covered with fine fabrics and linens and surrounded by delicious foods and teach this dhāraṇī-seal extensively to others from the tip of their tongue or, alternatively, write it down or read it, if any one of us does not come surrounded by hundreds of thousands of members in our retinues to such places to protect the Dharma teacher and the students, protect their assemblies, protect other beings, and bring beings to maturity; or if we and our retinues do not heed their command and protect them; or if we do not come there and fill their treasuries and granaries with much wealth and grain; or if we do not avert beings’ discord, quarrels, famines, diseases, foreign invasions, untimely rains, storms, cold snaps, and heatwaves, then we will have deceived, betrayed, and displeased the blessed buddhas of the past, present, and future.  Our bodies will then be struck by leprosy, our sight will deteriorate, and our bodies will rot. We and our retinues will propagate this Dharma method of the blessed {TK249} thus-gone Śākyamuni in both the present and the future in this four-continent world. We will teach this Dharma discourse. We will protect people who have faith in this Dharma discourse. We will nurture them. We will make them mature. {K160}We will encourage any Dharma teacher to teach this Dharma discourse in order to purify bad actions. We will cause the wealth, grain harvests, enjoyments, and pleasures of these Dharma teachers and students to increase. We will support the doctrine of the victorious ones so that it is not destroyed.”
Hearing this, all the blessed buddhas applauded all the human and nonhuman beings. The bodhisattva Kautūhalika, the great being, asked the thus-gone Śākyamuni, “Blessed One, what is this? Are all the billions of māras here with their retinues?” 
“Yes, they are here with their retinues,” the Blessed One replied.
The bodhisattva Kautūhalika then asked, “Have all of them and their retinues developed faith in the Three Jewels?”
“No, O noble son!” answered the Blessed One. “Māra, the evil one, who has thousands of servants, has not developed faith. He is outraged and frustrated now and will still be so in the future. He will wait and watch for the opportunity, for as long as this method of the sacred Dharma is glorified, to strive  to bring about {K161} its destruction and disappearance. Likewise, the eighty māras with their thirteen thousand servants, and the two hundred māras with their twenty-one servants, have not developed faith in the Three Jewels. They are outraged and frustrated now and will still be so in the future. As long as this method of the sacred {TK250} Dharma proliferates, they will wait and watch for the opportunity to harm my doctrine. They will strive to destroy and obliterate it. Why is this?
“It is because they are under the sway of their previous enmity. They have not planted any roots of virtue, have been taken in by evil companions, have no desire for the happiness of nirvāṇa, and are discouraged by virtue. Because they have not made any aspirations, they are unable to put their thoughts together, cannot be faithful, are never pleased, and do not become liberated. However, simply because they have seen this great gathering of the buddhas and heard this profound dhāraṇī discourse, they will later develop faith in unsurpassable and perfect awakening.”
“Blessed One, it is incredible,” marveled the bodhisattva Kautūhalika, {K162} “that if beings who have not produced roots of virtue hear this Dharma discourse, that in itself becomes a cause for their unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Well-Gone One, it is incredible.”
At that time there was a māra named Agasti who had worshiped former victors, developed roots of virtue, discovered unfailing faith in the Three Jewels, and received his prophecy of unsurpassed and perfect awakening. Appearing in the guise of a great sage, he sat before the thus-gone Śākyamuni. He rose from his seat and, gazing ahead, joined his palms together. Invigorated by the blessed buddhas, he filled the entire buddha field with his voice, saying,  “Buddhas and bodhisattva great beings, please give me your attention! Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, {TK251} mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, māras and your retinues, heed my words! This teacher, the blessed Śākyamuni, is a lord of great compassion. He is a teacher who eliminates all degenerated buddha fields and perfects them with a complete array of positive attributes. It is through his past aspirations that he fully awakened to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood in this kind of buddha field, which is rife with the afflictions and the five degenerations. Thus he proceeded to mature the minds of beings who have committed the acts of immediate retribution, who spurn the sacred Dharma, slander noble beings, develop roots of nonvirtue, and indulge in evil deeds. He set out to turn them back from the three lower realms, to bring them to maturity in the three vehicles, to establish them in absorption, dhāraṇī, and acceptance, to purify the buddha field, and to ensure that the lineage of the Three Jewels remains uninterrupted.
“I implore you to ensure, by whatever means necessary, that this Teacher’s doctrine remains for a long time, so that this way of the buddhas is put into practice and does not perish. Otherwise, whether now or in the future, should this doctrine of the victors that the Thus-Gone One teaches be deprecated, threatened, or assailed by anyone, whether a māra or their retinue, then I implore you all to prevent this situation and dispel distractions and the obstacle to virtue. The same applies should Māra, the sons or daughters of Māra, his male or female retinue, or his messengers wait and watch for the opportunity to harm those who uphold this sacred Dharma, who exert themselves in it or teach it; or if they do so to monks or nuns, laymen or laywomen, or any noble sons or daughters who have faith and listen to the Dharma; or if they do so to those who are diligent in body, speech, and mind, delight in the creation of merit,  and exert themselves in {TK252} acts of venerating the Three Jewels; or if they do so to those who exert themselves in discarding the afflictions ubiquitous in the three realms; or if they do so to those who seek to completely free all beings from suffering.
“I pray to all the blessed buddhas of the present: please bestow the mastery of activity upon me! All bodhisattva great beings, retinues of Māra, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans, please be on my side! All who abide on the earth within this buddha field, please be on my side in order to benefit all beings and ensure the longevity of the Buddha’s teaching, the way of the sacred Dharma. Bestow the mastery of mantra upon me! I shall then oppose Māra and his retinues by intoning a mantra that serves to destroy, disturb, harm, and intimidate them and destroy their magical powers. This mantra will hurt Māra, the sons or daughters of Māra, his male or female retinue, and his messengers, should they persist in arousing just a single faithless attitude toward the blessed ones’ teaching, or should they develop intentions to harm a monk, or even disturb his mind and the like for a brief moment, or cross-examine him. Should they decide to endanger any village, town, city, country, {TK253} capital, or border town;  or should they desire to cause strife, discord, famine, disease, or foreign invasions, or untimely winds, rain, cold, or heat, or any flooding, earthquakes, fissures in the earth, or falling meteors in a place where this Dharma discourse is taught; or should they spoil the nutrients in leaves, flowers, fruit, grain, or herbs, then, as soon as they form that wish, I will ravage them with plagues. I will make their bodies heavy, dark, degenerate, stinky, inefficient, and unable to get up. I will then tie them down with a fivefold noose and the like, until they are unable to move their limbs. I will then bring darkness upon them such that they no longer can see the shining sun. Because of the loss of their magical powers, their minds will then become disturbed and their six sense faculties will be unable to apprehend objects. The dhāraṇī is:
amale ahaṃ male ahaṃ male ajavava ajavava mūlasare vyākhasale jamasale haha haha haha ghora­saṭṭa jatakhaga jñeyakhaga vijñevāsakhaga amūkṣara kṣakṣakṣa kṣakṣakṣa mūlabaha khagasvakajña sva­parivartamūra ajñajña vāyujñajña {TK254} candra­sūryau­jñajña nāvaha­jñajña khurakṣa­jñajña baba­jñajña bhūta­koṭi­tathatā­jñajña sarva­jñebhir {K163} adhiṣṭhita­jñajña vakrama trigata­kṣava kṣamama­kṣama­jña kṣitā­māra­viṣaya svāhā!”
By the blessing of the omniscient ones, the ephemeral dominions of Māra faded away and became ineffective. The same happened to all those who harbored ill will. All the blessed buddhas applauded Kautūhalika, and so did all the bodhisattva great beings, the gods, and the other human and nonhuman beings.  Simultaneously, the earth in that area trembled, the waters were stirred, and the kings of mountains quaked. Except for those who had faith in the Buddha’s teachings and the bodhisattvas among them who had attained acceptance, Māra, his retinue, and the kaṭapūtanas were shaken.
Māra, the evil one, inquired of the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati, “O noble son, where has the power of the māra Agasti gone? And where is his might, if, because of the cruel Buddha, his own followers and also the power and valor of my own realm have been destroyed, the dark factions have been defeated, and the followers of the monk Gautama who preaches the extreme form of nihilism have been elevated? I myself, after hearing that dhāraṇī, have become stinky {TK255} and sweaty and unable to act. It has grown dark for me in all directions, and I can’t see the light. I am burning with great anguish.”
 “The māra Agasti, O evil one, has brought about the ruin of the entire realm of Māra, along with its power and valor,” replied the bodhisattva Dṛḍhamati. “This transpired through the blessing of all the buddhas, involving the power of all human and nonhuman beings. {K164} He pronounced this dhāraṇī with its mantra words that cannot be conquered by others. So please, evil one, be inspired with faith in the presence of the thus-gone ones and develop the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening, so that you may be freed from the suffering of your body, speech, and mind.”
Māra, the evil one, retorted, “I would rather endure worse suffering of my evil body, speech, and mind than this, far into the unreckonable future, than to develop the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening.”
This concludes the eleventh chapter on protecting the methods of the sacred Dharma in the “Ratnaketu” section of the Great Collection of Mahāyāna sūtras. {K165} {TK256}
Chapter 12
The great general of the yakṣas,  Āṭavaka, in the form of the yakṣa Bhīṣaṇaka, and Saṃjñika in the form of a deer, Jñānolka in the form of a monkey, Tṛṣṇājaha in the form of a jackal, and Chinnasrotas in the form of an elephant—these five great beings—were sitting not too far from the thus-gone Śākyamuni and in front of the thus-gone Kauṇḍiṇyārcis. From each of their bodies a pure light radiated, suffused with fragrance. Each of these five great beings was holding in his hands a great precious gem called Starlight for the sake of worshipping the Blessed One.
The bodhisattva Kautūhalika saw the profound purity of their hearts and minds. Thinking that they must be bodhisattva great beings, he addressed the great yakṣa general, Āṭavaka: “What purpose, O good man, do you see in your endeavor to worship the blessed buddhas through acting the way you do?”
Āṭavaka replied, “Formerly, O noble son, ninety eons ago, there was a thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Vipaśyin in this buddha field. At that time, the five of us were blood brothers. Once we developed the mind directed toward unsurpassed and perfect awakening, we earnestly applied ourselves to bringing beings to maturity. Later, following the time of the thus-gone Śikhin, the time of the thus-gone Viśvabhū, and right at the beginning of the Fortunate Eon {TK257} when the thus-gone Kakutsunda came to this world, {K166} we were again reborn as brothers because of our previous aspirations. We worshiped and served the thus-gone Kakutsunda a great deal. During that time, the lay practitioner Saṃjñika, the great being who delighted in  meditation, made the following great wish:
“ ‘I must become a great general of the yakṣas during the Fortunate Eon. I will give the appropriate Dharma instructions. I will give the appropriate Dharma instructions to the yakṣas, . . . and the kaṭapūtanas who roam forests and wildernesses in various deformed shapes and who are wicked, cruel, and have no compassion for beings. I will cause them to develop faith and embrace the training and will thus establish them on the auspicious path. I will teach the Dharma also to those yakṣas born in animal forms such as deer, antelope, pigs, and so forth, until I have brought to maturity, by means of the Dharma instructions, as many wicked yakṣas as there are grains of sand in the Gaṅgā, including also those in animal forms that have not planted the roots of virtue. I will thus establish them in the three vehicles, and after this I will obtain a prophecy with regard to my own unsurpassed and perfect awakening.’
“Similarly, the yakṣa Jñānolka, in the form of a monkey, made a wish to bring monkeys to maturity. Tṛṣṇājaha, in the form of a jackal, made a wish to bring to maturity beings born into unfree conditions fraught with danger. Chinnasrotas, in the form of an elephant, made a wish to bring elephants to maturity. In this way, twelve thousand yakṣas of great power, who lived in this world of the four continents, variously made wishes to bring beings to maturity, {TK258} as they themselves were seeking unsurpassed and perfect awakening. {K167}
“I, too, seeking unsurpassed and perfect awakening, made a wish in front of the thus-gone Kakutsunda to bring wicked yakṣas to maturity in this world, throughout the entire Fortunate Eon:
“ ‘Come what may, I must induce the wicked yakṣas to train so that I can establish them on the path of no return—the wicked yakṣas who are cruel, ungrateful, dangerous, inclined toward evil, and devoid of compassion . . . and the kaṭapūtanas who harm beings, steal their energy,  disturb their minds, inflame them with unwholesome thoughts, take their lives, . . . and who harbor wrong views; who disturb the minds of kṣatriyas, brahmins, vaiśyas, and śūdras; who plague countries, villages, towns, cities, and other inhabited areas; who upset the auspicious influence of planets, constellations, the moon, the sun, nights, days, months, fortnights, seasons, and years; who spread discord, quarrels, famine, disease, invasions by foreign armies, untimely winds and rains, and extreme cold and heat; who destroy seeds, herbs, leaves, flowers, fruits, and sap; and who cause the disappearance of all the happiness, contentment, and good health of beings, as well as social harmony, the desire for positive qualities, earth essences, vital force, wealth, and the taste for the Dharma and liberation. Later, I will obtain for myself a prophecy of unsurpassed and perfect awakening.’
“Ever since the time of making this vow, I have taken rebirth as a general of the wicked yakṣas, and brought the yakṣas . . . and kaṭapūtanas to maturity by establishing them within the three vehicles, thus establishing them on the path of no return. Ever since that time, when seeing beings of a lower, middling, or superior type, {TK259} I do not allow myself to ignore their capacities, and whatever bodily form I see, I assume the same form to address them, converse with them, reinvigorate them, cheer them up, cause them to turn away from evil, and establish them in a loving and compassionate mindset. According to their different inclinations, I establish them in the three vehicles, thus setting them on the path of no return. Whatever gathering of yakṣas I approach, I am greeted with the words, ‘Welcome to the forest-roaming yakṣa!’ Hence my name has become Āṭavaka, one who roams the woods.
“Humans who are presently deprived of the long-established Dharma, who do not practice restraint and who engage in singularly evil deeds, will plunge after death  into one of the three lower realms. Few of them will be reborn as humans. Those who engage in mixed activities and have no faith in the Three Jewels will, for the most part, fall after death into the realm of the wicked yakṣas . . . and kaṭapūtanas. This is why, in this time, there is in this world such {K168} a proliferation of wicked yakṣas . . . and kaṭapūtanas. All of them strive to make the white faction disappear.
“For this reason, while the dark age is upon us, I am unable at this time to cause these wicked yakṣas . . . and kaṭapūtanas to develop the qualities of gentleness and kindness. Nor am I able anymore to quell the disturbed mental states of any kṣatriyas, brahmins, vaiśyas, śūdras, ascetics, men, women, sons, or daughters or the disturbances suffered by villages, towns, cities, countries, or states. Nor am I able any longer to instill in the minds and thoughts of beings the fondness for liberation. O noble son, I have thoroughly understood, through the majesty and splendor of the buddhas, the hearts of all the yakṣas and kaṭapūtanas—their treachery and the stratagems they employ. {TK260}
“There is, O noble son, a very fierce and terrible dhāraṇī, a mantra of magic called the expanse of the vajra sky, which is the heart essence of all spirits. When the words of this dhāraṇī are employed, evil beings will no longer be able to disturb the kṣatriyas, . . . countries, or states—no yakṣa or yakṣiṇī, male or female yakṣa elder, yakṣa son or daughter, yakṣa or yakṣiṇī with a retinue, rākṣasa or rākṣasī, . . . nāga or nāginī, kumbhāṇḍa or kumbhāṇḍī, quotidian through quartan malarial fever-spirits, male or female pūtanas or kaṭapūtanas, male or female kaṭapūtana elders,  male or female kaṭapūtana offspring, or male or female kaṭapūtanas with a retinue.
“In any village, town, city, . . . or household where the mantra words of the expanse of the vajra sky, this very fierce and terrible spell that is the heart essence of all spirits, have been taught, these wicked yakṣas and kaṭapūtanas {K169} there will abandon their unwholesome acts and previously held grudges. They will all develop minds of loving kindness, compassion, gentleness, compassion for all spirits, and benevolence. They will then quell all the disturbances that affect countries, households, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and kaṭapūtanas, as well as all those that affect the moon, the sun, the planets, and the constellations. They will terminate punishments, neutralize poisons and weapons, and appease evil spirits. They will heal the bodies affected by imbalances of wind, bile, or phlegm, the malarial fever that lasts for one, two, three, or four days, and leprosy, ringworm, itching, {TK261} bronchitis, dermatitis, abdominal pain, and diseases of the limbs and digits.
“They will cause human and nonhuman beings, animals, and birds to engage in wholesome activities, and they will cause all their fear to subside, provide them with all kinds of pleasure and comfort, and ensure that they pass their nights and days in the right way. They will cause them to delight in virtue, generosity, and restraint, they will remove their weariness of body and mind, and they will engage them in the quest of the path to awakening.”
Āṭavaka, the great general of the yakṣas, then continued:
“If, O noble son, all the blessed buddhas would grant me the mastery of activity based on the mantra words of this expanse of the vajra sky, and if they empowered me and gave me their felicitous approval,  I would become the reciter and teacher of these mantra words, which are the heart essence of all spirits—words that quell all disturbances, inspire deep faith in beings, restrain all those who reinforce what is unwholesome, and support all those who reinforce what is wholesome.
“Thus-gone Śākyamuni, please confer upon me, through your blessings, the maṇḍala of sound that conveys words, so that I may fill this entire buddha field by its means with the sound of enunciated syllables and delight the members of the assembly gathered in it with the meaning, words, and letters that comprise this maṇḍala of sound that conveys words.” {K170}
The thus-gone Śākyamuni then spoke to Āṭavaka, the great general of the yakṣas:
“In order to scare away the black faction and glorify the white faction, the blessed buddhas now confer upon you, O noble son, the maṇḍala of sound that conveys words {TK262} for conveying this expanse of the vajra sky—this mantra-dhāraṇī that is the heart essence of all spirits. Act with courage, O good man, and recite the mantra words of this expanse of the vajra sky that quells all disturbances—this mantra-dhāraṇī that is the heart essence of all spirits and restrains all wicked beings.”
Āṭavaka, the great general of the yakṣas, now got up from his seat, bowed with folded hands in the direction of the thus-gone Śākyamuni, and, making the entire buddha field resound with the sound of his voice, uttered the following mantra words:
“dhuma dhuma dhama dhama dhūma dhūma nili na nala nola milā kuṭanī kuṭane mahākuṭane ṭaṭa ṭaṭo mahāṭaṭo abhaṣa abhi abhi riṇi riṇi mahāriṇi riṇi rimi rimi rimi rimi dārimi riṣe mahāriṣe śulu śulu mahāśulu śulu śulutha mahāśulu śulu uguma  guma gumana rimi rimi hiri hiri hiri hiri hiri hiri hiri hiri hiri hiri nimi nimi nihi nihi muni muni buddhi li pravarā sṛṣṭhaloka caryājine jine jina­rṣabha jinā jina jina­rṣabha svāhā!”
He then continued:
“O Blessed One! If in any village, town, . . . or household where this expanse of the vajra sky—this mantra-dhāraṇī that is the heart essence {TK263} of all spirits, this great spell consisting of mantra words—is recited, the wicked yakṣas . . . and kaṭapūtanas do not develop faith in their minds; if they do not fully embrace the study and training with their body, speech, and mind; {K171} and if they do not give rise to loving kindness for the beings there, then I will recite, for their sake, even more terrible mantra words. They are:
acche acche mune mune agne hu hu mune mune manārṣabha hu hu akradaṇḍe atadaṇḍe ata ati aṭa hini hini hiri hiri hiri hiri hiri hiri traguma guma guma guma hili hili nili nili mahānili samudramekha haṭa haṭa haṭa dharaṇamekha kṣabhakha kṣabhakha pṛthivī apa tejo vāyv ākāśa ṭha ṭha ṭha guṃbhe bhagumbhe akṣi kumbhe jihvāgu­gumbhe sarvā­guṃbhe raja­gumbhe sabhāstu­gumbhe svāhā!”
As soon as Āṭavaka, the great general of the yakṣas, intoned these mantra words, all the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and kaṭapūtanas were jolted with fear, trembling violently wherever they were on earth or in the sky. They immediately folded their hands toward the blessed buddhas, bowing three times, and said, {TK264} “Homage to all the blessed buddhas! Homage, homage to all the blessed buddhas! These mantra words that penetrate  the hearts of all the spirits, just intoned by Āṭavaka, the great general of the yakṣas, are extremely terrifying.”
This concludes the twelfth chapter, about Āṭavaka, in the “Ratnaketu Sūtra” from the Great Collection of Mahāyāna sūtras. {K172} {TK265}
Chapter 13
At this time, all the blessed buddhas displayed the signs of rising and returning to their respective buddha fields. At the same moment, the beings of this entire assembly, who were on earth as well as in the sky, shuddered, and so did the entire earth. A rain of flowers poured from the sky, millions of instruments resounded in midair, and all kinds of fragrances of perfume and incense were released. As the entire buddha field filled with light, those in the assembly pressed their hands together. Then Brahmā, lord of the Sahā world, asked the thus-gone Mahācandanagandha, “How many roots of virtue, O Blessed One, will those beings accumulate who in the future uphold and preserve this Dharma discourse—who read it, master it, and teach it authentically and extensively to others? How many roots of virtue will those beings accumulate who set it down in writing and uphold it in writing? What qualities will they be rewarded with by the blessed buddhas?”
Thus addressed, the blessed, thus-gone Mahācandanagandha replied to Brahmā, lord of the Sahā world, “Just as the six realms, O Brahmā, have been blessed by all the buddhas in order to fend off the black faction of Māra, to pacify all the negativity of the dark age, to bring beings to maturity, to ensure the continuity of this Dharma method {TK266} for a long time, and to purify the path, so too will the beings of the future be blessed by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas with the ten perquisites if they uphold this Dharma discourse  . . . and write it down and preserve it. What are these ten perquisites? {K173}
 “(1) Through the power of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, O Brahmā, you will duly set these beings apart and always protect them from all the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, rākṣasas, and kumbhāṇḍas. (2) You will cause them to turn away from that which is worthless and fully engage their body, speech, and mind in that which is wholesome. (3) You will provide them with ample food, drink, comfort, pleasures, good health, and good fortune when they are alive, and support them at the time when they give up their lives. (4) They will become skilled in faultless memory, mental faculties, and eloquence. (5) Being free from attachment to sense pleasures and from mental fabrications, they will be at ease and immersed in emptiness. (6) Possessed of equanimous minds merged with the dhāraṇī and of profound acceptance, they will engage in the acts of attracting beings. (7) Engaged in wholesome practices, devoting their energy to the body of the assembly, completely free from the three things, they will master the conduct of awakening. (8) They will attain the absorption jeweled banner, through which they will become adroit in the insightful knowledge of all absorptions. (9) At the time of dying they will perceive standing in front of them innumerable blessed buddhas, passing their time in the company of their retinues of monks and the hosts of bodhisattvas and explaining the Dharma. They will hear the Dharma that is being thus explained complete with its meaning, words, and letters.  (10) To ensure that they obtain spiritual joy and grace—noble and distinguished in every respect—all the karmic obstacles of nonvirtue {K174} will be extinguished in their last moment of consciousness at the time of dying, in accord with the Dharma. After death they will take miraculous birth, just as they wished, in pure buddha fields. They will live together with other beings established in the Mahāyāna, who possess unobscured knowledge and minds equal to the sky, in any of the buddha fields {TK267} where the blessed buddhas live and pass their time teaching the pure Mahāyāna doctrine. Before long, they themselves will acquire the same qualities. They will not be born again in a buddha field afflicted with the five degenerations, unless they aspire to do so. They will swiftly awaken fully and completely to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
“With these ten perquisites the blessed buddhas will bless these beings who, in present and future times, glorify this Dharma method, and uphold, . . . write down, and preserve this Dharma discourse, this dhāraṇī-seal, in the form of a book. These beings, blessed by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, will become bodhisattva great beings who are freed from all depravities stemming from the afflictions.”
Now the blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni addressed the world protectors, Śakra and Brahmā:
“Friends, the blessed buddhas here, who have all congregated from the ten directions, have now given this extraordinary and wonderful exposition—this Dharma discourse never heard before on the profound dhāraṇī with its special words. They have given it out of compassion for you and in order to purify the external objects in this world system.  They have taught it in order to bring beings to maturity, show them the conduct leading to awakening, defeat the faction of Māra, raise the banner of Dharma, demonstrate by their own example how to carry out the work of all the buddhas, ensure the continuity of the lineage of the Three Jewels, quell all diseases, restrain all wicked beings, protect from all fear, {K175} cause beings to abandon wrong views and enter the path of awakening, endow them fully with the ten strengths of a thus-gone one, and exhaust all their action and afflictions. They have taught it so that households, villages, towns, districts, . . . and the worlds consisting of four continents, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, human and nonhuman beings, grain, medicinal herbs, leaves, flowers, fruits, crops, Dharma teachers, and Dharma students will be protected. They have taught it to facilitate the attainment of the unobstructed dhāraṇī, the wisdom that is equal to space, {TK268} and the omniscient wisdom particular to the single principle.
“Through this Dharma discourse, my friends, each and everything in this buddha field has been empowered in ten different ways by the blessed buddhas, as a result of their knowledge suffused with great compassion.
“(1) Friends, this entire buddha field has been adopted by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas so that it may be blessed with all things virtuous. (2) It has become an object of veneration for all beings born in buddha fields. (3) It represents the teacher. (4) It is generally revered as the spiritual instructor. (5) It is a fitting object of worship. (6) It is a place where even those who have roots of nonvirtue, including the five acts of immediate retribution, can completely purify their karmic obscurations, which would otherwise ripen unpleasantly. (7) Once these karmic obscurations are removed, one can become established in good qualities.  (8) This buddha field, friends, is the maker of great men—the blessed buddhas. (9) This buddha field, friends, is the place where you should respect the Dharma, uphold it, and protect it. (10) In this buddha field you should also protect the householders and the wandering mendicants who uphold the Dharma, and persons who have adopted the sacred Dharma. This will contribute to your own happiness and prosperity.” {K176}
Now, to illustrate the good qualities and benefits of this Dharma discourse, the thus-gone Kusumadhvaja said:
“The merit of someone who fills all the fields with gold and offers them
To the protectors and guides in order to worship them would be finite;
A fearless person who upholds this supreme, important sūtra, however,
Would obtain infinite merit.” {13.1}
The thus-gone Ratnacchatraśrī said: {TK269}
“By teaching this sūtra one accumulates the same merit as by giving to the eminent sages gold coins equal in number to the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā.
“Merit equal to that gained by upholding this sūtra cannot even be attained
By giving to the eminent sages
Gold coins equal in number
To the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā.” {13.2}
The thus-gone Girikūṭa said:
“Anybody could fill the sky with clouds dense with heaps of the best flowers and parasols
And offer them to the buddhas with a joyful mind in order to worship them,
But the person who upholds this sūtra later, at a degenerate time full of fear and violence,
Would accumulate merit whose extent no being could describe.” {13.3}
Even the blessed, thus-gone Śākyamuni spoke as follows:
“One could, before this sage, hold up a burning wick fed with scented oil as big as Mount Meru
For the duration of ten million eons, one’s face smiling with devotion,
But someone desirous of merit and seeking to reduce hindrances 
Would gain far greater merit by teaching this sūtra in public during this degenerate time.”  {13.4}
The thus-gone Akṣobhya said:
“Any intelligent person can always cultivate acceptance and practice diligence.
Continually devoted to meditation, mindful of their body, they may develop their insight, {K177}
But those who uphold this seal of the sacred Dharma in this world during the dark age
Possess unequaled acceptance and diligence, and their insight is also superior.” {13.5}
The thus-gone Virajasamādhibalavikrāmin said:
“It is not possible to describe the merit acquired 
By someone who propagates this sūtra in this world, upholds it, writes it down,
Causes others to learn it by skillfully explaining it again and again,
And worships it with incense, flowers, garlands, and the best quality fabrics.” {13.6} {TK270}
Continuing like this, infinite numbers of blessed buddhas proclaimed the immeasurable virtues, qualities, and benefits of this sūtra. Having then summoned the world protectors, Śakra, and Brahmā, they instructed them, “Please, friends, uphold this Dharma discourse that exhausts all karmic obscurations and the afflictions. By merely hearing this discourse during the later degenerate time, all karmic obscurations and the afflictions of sentient beings will be exhausted.”
So spoke the Blessed One. The entire assembly and the worlds of gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised this teaching by the Blessed One.
This concludes the thirteenth chapter, the final in the “Ratnaketu Sūtra,” in the Great Collection of Mahāyāna sūtras. {K178}
Because of the special merit that I have accumulated when refining, with all my devotion, care, and a joyous mind,
The text of this Ratnaketu Dhāraṇī—the dhāraṇī that removes great fear—
May this entire world obtain in this very moment this Ratnaketu Dhāraṇī
Adorned with words of the Sage’s doctrine, clear in meaning, and resplendent with great qualities!
Tibetan Translators’ Colophon
This sūtra was translated by the Indian preceptor Śilendrabodhi and the translator-editor Yeshé Dé. It was later standardized in line with the new terminological register.