{{translation:{id:UT22084-061-013,key:toh193,version:2.20.19,style:plain}}}
The Noble
Prophecy of Śrī Mahādevī
 Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavān was dwelling in Sukhāvatī together with the great saṅgha of bodhisattvas, among them the following bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the excellent eon: Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ārya Avalokiteśvara, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkaṃbhin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Kṣitigarbha, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajrapāṇi, and Bodhisattva Sarvabhayahara, and similarly Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­maṅgala­dhārin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­puṇya­lakṣaṇa­dhārin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Candra­sūrya­trailokya­dhārin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­tīrtha­maṅgala­dhārin, and Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta.
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara went to the place where the Bhagavān was, paid homage at the Bhagavān’s feet, and remained at one side. Śrī Mahādevī also went toward the Bhagavān, paid homage at his feet, and circumambulated him three times. Then she also paid homage to all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who were dwelling in Sukhāvati and remained at one side.
The Bhagavān was adorned with many hundreds of thousands of merits and surrounded by as many as ten million tathāgatas. As Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world all offered their praises and acclaim, the Bhagavān, having gazed at Śrī Mahādevī, addressed Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara as follows in his Great Brahmā voice:
“Avalokiteśvara, if any one of the kings, ministers, bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, upāsikās, brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, or śūdras retains this praise, “The One Hundred and Eight Names of Śrī Mahādevī Which Are Renowned as Stainless,” then the kṣatriya king’s kingdom, the fears of those beings there, as well as the epidemics and harmful influences will all be pacified, and no one at all will fear robbers, rogues, humans, or nonhumans. Wealth, grains, treasuries, and stores will all increase, and the Glorious Mahādevī will no doubt abide in the home of this kṣatriya king.”
Then those bodhisattva mahāsattvas said, “Bhagavāṇ, these words are well said. Excellent! Excellent! Those people who will retain the names of Śrī Mahādevī and who will put them into practice once they have heard them will have those aforementioned qualities and benefits.”
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ārya Avalokiteśvara asked the Bhagavān, “Bhagavān, where did Śrī Mahādevī generate her roots of virtue?”
The Bhagavān replied, “Śrī Mahādevī  generated roots of virtue in the presence of tathāgatas as numerous as the grains of sand of the river Ganges. O Avalokiteśvara, in the past, in a world system called Ratna­saṃbhavā, the tathāgata called Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāṃcana­prabhāsa­śrī came forth into the world. Śrī Mahādevī generated roots of virtue in his presence and in the presence of many other tathāgatas, too. Now, the names of the tathāgatas make Śrī Mahādevī’s roots of virtue flourish and come to fulfillment. They stay with her always, these names that here in this world Śrī Mahādevī recites precisely and that dispel all sins, eliminate all offenses, make all effects stainless, gather and increase wealth and grains, eradicate poverty, attract and catch the attention of all gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas, pacifying all epidemics, natural misfortunes, disputes, conflicts, dissensions, and arguments, and that will bring the six perfections to fulfilment. They are as follows:
“Homage to Tathāgata Śrīghana.
Homage to Tathāgata Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāṃcana­prabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Gaṅgāsarva­tīrthamukha­maṅgala­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Candana­kusuma­tejo­nakṣatra­prabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Samantāvabhāsa­vijita­saṃgrāma­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Guṇa­samudrāvabhāsa­maṇḍala­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Dhārma­vikurvaṇa­dhvaja­vega­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Jyotiḥsaumya­gandhāvabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sattvāśaya­śamana­śarīra­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Praṇidhāna­sāgarāvabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Su­parikīrtita­nāmadheya­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Asaṃkhyeya­vīrya­susaṃprasthita­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Aprameya­suvarṇotta­prabhāsa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­svarāṅga­ruta­nirghoṣa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Prajñā­pradīpāsaṃkhyeya­prabhā­ketu­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Nārāyaṇa­vrata­sannāha­sumeru­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Brahmaśrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Maheśvaraśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Candrasūryaśrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Gambhīra­dharma­prabhā­rāja­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Gagana­pradīpābhirāma­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sūrya­prabhā­ketu­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Gandha­pradīpa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sāgara­garbha­saṃbhava­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Nirmita­megha­garjanayaśaḥ­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­dharma­prabhāsa­vyūha­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Druma­rāja­vivardhita­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Ratnārciḥparvata­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Jñānārciḥsāgara­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Mahā­praṇidhi­vega­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Mahāmeghaśrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Smṛtiketu­rāja­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­dhana­dhānyākarṣaṇa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Saumyākarṣaṇa­śrī.
Homage to Tathāgata Lakṣmyākarṣaṇa­śrī.
“Having treated these names of tathāgatas with veneration, one should retain and recite them, and in this way the merit of a son or daughter of a noble family will increase immensely.
“Now, all the tathāgatas made the following prophecies concerning Śrī Mahādevī: ‘Śrī Mahādevī, in the future you will become the tathāgata, the arhat, the truly complete buddha called Śrī­maṇi­ratna­sambhava in the world system called Śrī­mahā­ratna­pratimaṇḍitā. And that world system will be adorned with various sorts of divine jewels. This very tathāgata will spread light in that world system, and those bodhisattvas dwelling there in that world will spontaneously become radiant and have immeasurable life spans. The word buddha­dharma­saṅgha will also come down from the sky, and the bodhisattvas who will be born in that buddha field will all be born from the centers of lotuses.’ 
“What is the twelve-line praise with one hundred and eight names that is renowned as being stainless?
“O fearless Avalokiteśvara, please hearken to the names of Śrī Mahādevī. They are as follows:
 “Sarva­tathāgatābhiṣiktā (She Who Was Empowered by All Tathāgatas),
 Sarva­devatābhiṣiktā (She Who Was Empowered by All Gods),
 Sarva­tathāgata­mātṛ (Mother of All Tathāgatas),
 Sarva­devatā­mātṛ (Mother of All Gods),
 Sarva­tathāgata­śrī (Glory of All Tathāgatas),
 Sarva­bodhisattva­śrī (Glory of All Bodhisattvas),
 Sarvārya­śrāvaka­pratyeka­buddha­śrī (Glory of All Ārya Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas),
 Brahma­viṣṇu­maheśvara­śrī (Glory of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara),
 Mahā­sthāna­gata­śrī (Glory Present in Great Places),
 Sarva­devatābhimukha­śrī (Glory in the Presence of All Gods),
 Sarva­deva­nāga­yakṣa­gandharvāsura­garuḍa­kinnara­mahoraga­śrī (Glory of All the Gods, Nāgas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garuḍas, Kinnaras, and Mahoragas),
 Sarva­vidyā­dhara­vajra­pāṇi­vajra­dhara­śrī (Glory of All the Vidyādharas, Vajrapāṇi, and the Vajradharas),
 Catuḥpañca­lokapāla­śrī (Glory of the Four and the Five Guardians of the World),
 Aṣṭa­grahāṣṭāviṃśati­nakṣatra­śrī (Glory of the Eight Planets and Twenty-Eight Constellations),
 Oṃ Sāvitrī (Daughter of Savitra),
 Dhātrī (Nurse),
 Mātṛ (Mother),
 Caturvedaśrī (Glory of the Four Vedas),
 Lakṣmī (Goddess of Prosperity),
 Bhūtamātṛ (Mother of Sentient Beings),
 Jayā (She Who Is Victorious),
 Vijayā (She Who Conquers),
 Gaṅgā (She Who Is the Ganges),
 Sarvatīrthā (She of All Holy Places),
Sarvamaṅgalyā (She Who Confers All Auspiciousness),
 Vimala­nirmala­kara­śrī (Glory That Makes One Stainless and Pure),
 Sarva­pāpa­hantrī (She Who Slays All Sins),
 Nirmadakarā (She Who Humbles),
 Candraśrī (Glory of the Moon),
 Sūryaśrī (Glory of the Sun),
 Sarvagrahaśrī (Glory of All the Planets),
 Siṃhavāhinī (She Who Rides upon a Lion),
 Śata­sahasra­koṭipadma­vivara­saṃcchannā (She Who Is Enveloped by a Display of One Hundred Thousand Crore Lotuses),
 Padmā (She Who Has Lotuses),
 Padmasambhavā (She Who Was Born from a Lotus),
 Padmālayā (She Whose Abode Is a Lotus),
 Padmadharā (She Who Holds a Lotus),
 Padmāvatī (She Who Is Endowed with Lotuses),
 Aneka­ratnāṃśu­mālā (She Who Has a Garland of Many Light Rays That Are Like Jewels),
 Dhanadā (She Who Brings Wealth),
 Śvetā (Fair One),
 Mahāśvetā (Great Fair One),
 Śvetabhujā (She Who Has Fair Arms),
 Sarva­maṅgala­dhāriṇī (She Who Possesses All Auspiciousness), 
 Sarva­puṇyopacitāṅgī (She Whose Body Consists of All Collections of Merit), 
 Dākṣāyaṇī (Daughter of Dakṣa), 
 Śata­sahasra­bhujā (She Who Has One Hundred Thousand Arms),
 Śata­sahasra­nayanā (She Who Has One Hundred Thousand Eyes),
 Śata­sahasra­śirā (She Who Has One Hundred Thousand Heads), 
 Vividha­vicitra­maṇi­mauli­dharā (She Who Bears a Diadem of Many Sorts of Multicolored Jewels),
 Surūpā (She Who Has a Beautiful Form),
 Viśvarūpā (She Who Has All Different Forms),
 Yaśā (Renowned One),
 Mahāyaśā (Highly Renowned One),
 Saumyā (Benign One),
 Bahujīmūtā (She of the Many Clouds),
 Pavitrakeśā (She Whose Hair Is Purity),
 Candrakāntā (She Who Is Lovely Like the Moon),
 Sūryakāntā (She Who Is Lovely Like the Sun),
 Śubhā (Virtuous One),
 Śubhakartrī (She Who Brings About Virtue),
 Sarva­sattvābhimukhī (She Who Is Disposed toward All Sentient Beings),
 Āryā (Noble One),
 Kusumaśrī (Glory of the Flowers), 
 Kusumeśvarā (She Who Is the Sovereign of the Flowers),
 Sarva­sumeru­parvata­rāja­śrī (Glory of the Entire King of Mountains, Mount Sumeru),
 Sarva­nadī­saricchrī (Glory of All Rivers and Streams),
 Sarva­toya­samudra­śrī (Glory of the Ocean of All Waters),
 Sarva­tīrthābhimukha­śrī (Glory of Turning toward All the Holy Places),
 Sarvauṣadhi­tṛṇa­vanaspati­dhana­dhānya­śrī (Glory of All Medicinal Herbs, Grasses, Trees, Wealth, and Grains),
 Hiraṇyadā (She Who Gives Gold),
 Annapānadā (She Who Gives Food and Drink),
 Prabhāsvarā (She of the Clear Light),
 Ālokakarā (She Who Illuminates),
 Pavitrāṅgā (She of the Pure Body),
 Sarva­tathāgata­vaśavartinī (She Who Has Power over All Tathāgatas),
 Sarva­deva­gaṇa­mukha­śrī (Glory When in the Presence of the Entire Assembly of the Gods),
 Yama­varuṇa­kubera­vāsava­śrī (Glory of Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera, and Vāsava),
 Dātrī (She Who Gives),
 Bhoktrī (She Who Takes Pleasure),
 Tejā (She Who Is Brilliance),
 Tejovatī (Bright One),
 Vibhūtī (Abundance),
 Samṛddhi (Great Prosperity),
 Vivṛddhi (Growth),
 Unnati (Advancement),
 Dharmaśrī (Glory of the Dharma),
 Mādhavāśrayā (She Who Relies on Viṣṇu),
 Kusumanilayā (She Whose Abode Is the Flowers),
 Anasūyā (She Who Is Not Spiteful),
 Puruṣa­kārā­śrayā (She Who Relies on Virile Action),
Sarvapavitragātrā (She Whose Body Is Entirely Pure),
Maṅgalahastā (She Whose Hands Are Auspicious),
 Sarvālakṣmī­nāśayitrī (She Who Destroys All Inauspiciousness),
 Sarva­puṇyākarṣaṇa­śrī (Glory That Collects All Merits),
 Sarva­pṛthivī­śrī (Glory of the Entire Earth),
Sarvarājaśrī (Glory of All Kings),
 Sarva­vidyā­dhara­rāja­śrī (Glory of the King of All Vidyādharas),
 Sarva­bhūta­yakṣa­rākṣasa­preta­piśāca­kuṃbhāṇḍa­mahoraga­śrī (Glory of All Bhūtas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Pretas, Piśācas, Kumbhāṇḍas, and Mahoragas),
 Dyuti (Splendor),
 Pramoda­bhāgya­lolā (She Who Longs for Delight and Happiness),
 Sarva­rṣi­pavitra­śrī (Glory That Is the Purity of All Seers),
 Sarvaśrī (Glory of All),
Bhavajyeṣṭhottamaśrī (Glory That Is the First and the Foremost in Existence),
 Sarva­kinnara­sarvāsuryottama­śrī (Glory That Is the First of All Kinnaras and of All Asuras),
 Nir­avadya­sthāna­vāsinī (She Who Stays Irreproachable),
 Rūpavatī (Beautiful One),
 Sukhakarī (She Who Causes Happiness),
 Kuberakāntā (Beloved of Kubera), and
 Dharmarājaśrī (Glory of the Dharma King):
“Oṃ! Look at us, save us, and emancipate us from all sufferings. Make us turn in the direction of all collections of merits, svāhā.Oṃ gaṅgādi­sarva­tīrthānām abhimukhī kuru svāhā | oṃ sāvitryai svāhā | sarva­maṅgala­dhāriṇyai svāhā | catur­veda­nakṣatra­graha­gaṇādimūrtyai svāhā | brahmaṇe svāhā | viṣṇave svāhā | rudrāya svāhā | viśva­mukhāya svāhā | oṃ nigrigrini sarva­kāryasādhani sini sini āvāhayāmi devi śrī­vaiśravaṇāya svāhā | suvarṇa­dhana­dhānyākarṣaṇyai svāhā | sarva­puṇyā­karṣaṇyai svāhā | śrī­devatākarṣaṇyai svāhā | sarva­pāpanāśanyai svāhā | sarvā­lakṣmī­praśamanyai svāhā | sarva­tathāgatābhiṣiktāyai svāhā | sarva­devatābhimukhaśriye svāhā | āyur­bala­varṇa­karāyai svāhā | sarva­pavitra­maṅgala­hastāyai svāhā | siṃha­vāhinyai svāhā | padma­saṃbhūtāyai svāhā | sarva­kṛtya­kākhordavināśanyai svāhā.
“Fearless Avalokiteśvara, anyone who is going to retain and recite these names of Śrī Mahādevī—which eliminate all offenses, overcome all sins, accumulate all merits, eliminate all inauspiciousness, and accumulate all glories, happiness, and good fortune—and who is going to retain and recite these names of the tathāgatas, should rise in the morning, clean up, and, having offered flowers and incense to all the buddhas, also offer sandalwood incense to Śrī Mahādevī.  Then, when they recite these names, all glory, all happiness and joys, will be obtained. The gods will all guard, protect, and preserve them, and all of their purposes will be fulfilled.”
When the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the fearless bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara,  Śrī Mahādevī, the entire retinue, and the world, including gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas, rejoiced and [678] praised the words of the Bhagavān.
This completes “The Noble Prophecy of Śrī Mahādevī.”