{{translation:{key:toh10,version:1.0.18,style:plain}}}
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra
The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines
Chapter 1: Introduction
 We prostrate to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Lord dwelt at Rājagṛha on Gṛdhrakūṭa Hill together with a great community of monks, numbering five thousand monks, all worthy ones with the exception of one single person—that is, venerable Ānanda—with outflows dried up, without afflictions, fully controlled, with their minds well freed and their wisdom well freed, thoroughbreds, great bull elephants, with their work done, their task accomplished, with their burden laid down, with their own goal accomplished, with the fetters that bound them to existence broken, with their hearts well freed by perfect understanding, in perfect control of their whole mind;  with nuns numbering five hundred—Yaśodharā, Mahāprajāpatī, and so on—and with a great many laymen and laywomen, all of them with a vision of the Dharma; and with an unbounded, infinite number of bodhisattva great beings, all of whom had acquired the dhāraṇīs, were dwellers in emptiness, their range the signless, and who had not fashioned any wishes, had acquired forbearance for the sameness of all dharmas, had acquired the dhāraṇī of nonattachment, with imperishable clairvoyant knowledges, and with speech worth listening to; who were not hypocrites, not fawners, without thoughts of reputation and gain; who were Dharma teachers without thought of compensation, with perfect forbearance for the deep dharmas, who had obtained the fearlessnesses, and who had transcended all the works of Māra, who had cut the continuum of karmic obscuration, were skillful in expounding the analysis of investigations into phenomena, with the prayer that is a vow made during an asaṃkhyeya of eons really fully carried out, with smiling countenances, forward in addressing others, without a frown on their faces, skillful in communicating with others in chanted verse, without feelings of depression, without losing the confidence giving a readiness to speak, and endowed with fearlessness when surpassing endless assemblies; who were skilled in going forth during an ananta of one hundred million eons, understanding phenomena to be like an illusion, a mirage, a reflection of the moon in water, a dream, an echo, an apparition, a reflection in the mirror, and a magical creation; who were skillful in comprehending the thoughts, conduct, and beliefs of all beings and subtle knowledge,  with unobstructed thoughts, and endowed with extreme patience; who were skilled in causing entry into reality just as it is, having appropriated all the endless arrays of the buddhafields through prayer and setting out, with the meditative stabilization recollecting buddhas in an infinite number of world systems constantly and always activated; who were skillful in soliciting innumerable buddhas; who were skillful in eliminating the various views, propensities, obsessions, and defilements; and who were skillful in accomplishing a hundred thousand feats through meditative concentration. That is, he was together with the bodhisattva great beings Bhadrapāla, Ratnākara, Ratnagarbha, Ratnadatta, Susārthavaha, Varuṇadeva, Guhyagupta, Indradatta, Uttaramatin, Viśeṣamatin, Vardhamāna­matin, Anantamati, Amoghadarśin, Anāvaraṇamatin, Susaṃprasthita, Su­vikrānta­vikrāmin, Anantavīrya, Nityodyukta, Nityaprayukta, Anikṣiptadhura, Sūryagarbha, Anupamamatin, and Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, Māra­bala­pramardin, Vajramatin, Ratna­mudrā­hasta, Nityotkṣipta­hasta, Mahā­karuṇā­cinta, Mahāvyūha, Vyūharāja, and Merukūṭa, the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, and many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion other bodhisattvas as well. 
 Thereupon the Lord, having himself arranged the lion throne, sat down with his legs crossed, holding his body erect, intent on fixing mindfulness, and entered into the meditative stabilization, samādhirāja by name, in which all meditative stabilizations are put, included, encompassed, and come to meet.
 Then the Lord, mindful and self-possessed, emerged from this meditative stabilization and surveyed with his divine eye all world systems. Having done so, he beamed with his whole body. From the wheels with a thousand spokes on the soles of his feet issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays, from the ten toes of his feet issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays, and similarly from his ankles, legs, knees, thighs, hips, and navel, from his two sides, and from the śrīvatsa mark of a great person in his heart issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays. From his ten fingers issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays. Similarly, from his two forearms, two shoulders, neck, four eyeteeth, all forty teeth, two nostrils, ears, and eyes, ūrṇā, the uṣṇīṣa on the top of his head, and from the opening of his mouth issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays. All these sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays pervaded the world systems in their entirety with a great illumination and lit them up. This great illumination from the light rays spread out through as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. Similarly, this great illumination from the light rays spread out through each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, northwest, below and above, and lit them up. And all the beings  who saw that light, who were touched by the illumination of those light rays, became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 Thereupon all the Lord’s hair pores became radiant. From each of the hair pores sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays issued forth, and these rays pervaded all the world systems in the great billionfold world system with a great illumination. This great illumination from the light rays spread out through as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east, pervading them with a great illumination and lighting them up. Similarly, this illumination from the light rays spread out through each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, and lit them up. And all the beings who saw that light, who were touched by the illumination of those light rays, became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 Then the Lord, with the light from the natural splendor of a tathāgata, pervaded the great billionfold world system with a great illumination. He pervaded as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east with this great illumination, and he similarly pervaded each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, with this great illumination. And all the beings who saw that light, who were touched by the illumination of those light rays, became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 Thereupon the Lord extended his tongue and with it covered the great billionfold world system in its entirety.  Having pervaded the great billionfold world system with his tongue, he smiled, and from his tongue again many hundred thousand one hundred million billion variously colored rays issued forth, and on all the light rays stood lotuses made of manifold precious stones, shining like gold, each with a thousand petals, variegated, beautiful, captivating, brilliant, fragrant, and soft, all completely like the kācalindika, pleasing to the touch. On the lotuses, furthermore, were seated many embodied tathāgatas, teaching Dharma—this very teaching of Dharma associated with the six perfections. They went to as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east and taught Dharma—this very teaching of Dharma associated with the perfection of wisdom—and similarly, to each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, and taught Dharma—this very teaching of Dharma associated with the six perfections. And all the beings who listened to that Dharma became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 Then the Lord, seated on that very lion throne, entered into the meditative stabilization called siṃhavikrīḍita. He enacted such a performance with his miraculous power that his performance of miraculous power shook the great billionfold world system in six ways: it shook, shook greatly, and shook violently; it quaked, quaked greatly, and quaked violently; it stirred, stirred greatly, and stirred violently; it became disturbed, greatly disturbed, and violently disturbed;  it roared, roared greatly, and roared violently; and it resounded, resounded greatly, and resounded violently. At the edges it rose up and it sank down in the middle; in the middle it rose up and at the edges sank down. It became soft and oily, producing benefit and ease for all beings. Thereupon, at that moment, minute, and second, in the great billionfold world system the continuums of the hells and the animal world, and the world of Yama, were all cut. And all the places that preclude a perfect human birth disappeared. All those beings were reborn among humans, and also among the Cāturmahā­rājika, Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods.
 Thereupon, in their great joy and rejoicing these humans and gods recalled their former lives, and having recalled them approached the Lord, bowed to his feet with their heads, cupped their palms together in a gesture of prayerful supplication, and bowed forward. And so too in each of the ten directions, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east, to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions, and below and above, the continuums of the hells, animal worlds, and the worlds of Yama in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River were all cut too. And all the places precluding a perfect human birth disappeared. All those beings were reborn among humans and the gods. Thereupon these humans and gods recalled their former lives. In their great joy and rejoicing they then approached the buddhas in their respective buddhafields, bowed to their feet with their heads,  and with palms together in a gesture of prayerful supplication bowed forward.
 Then, in the great billionfold world system, the beings who were born blind saw forms with their eyes, the deaf heard sounds with their ears, the insane regained their senses, those with distracted thoughts became one-pointed in their thoughts, the naked found clothes, the poor found wealth, the hungry found food, the thirsty found drink, the sick were healed, the sense faculties of those with damaged sense faculties were repaired, and the physically exhausted became no longer exhausted. Those who had not given up unwholesome deeds of body, speech, and mind, and unwholesome livelihood, gave up their unwholesome habits. All beings considered every being in the same way as they considered their mother, father, brother, and sister, and as they considered their friends, kinsmen, and blood relatives. And they were endowed with the ten wholesome actions and became celibate, pure, free from the stain of immorality, and free from all unwholesome conceptualization. And at that time all beings, possessed of all happiness, acquired the ease a monk feels when absorbed in the third concentration. And at that very time they were endowed with such knowledge that they knew, “Good is charity! Good is self-discipline! Good is restraint! Good it is to observe celibacy! Good is nonviolence toward living creatures!” And at that time  the lord buddhas in other buddhafields cried out cries of delight: “Ah! It is amazing these beings are thus endowed with such knowledge that knows, ‘Good is charity! Good is self-discipline! Good is restraint! Good it is to observe celibacy! Good is nonviolence toward living creatures!’ ” 
 Thereupon the Lord, seated on this very lion throne, stood out towering over the great billionfold world system with Sumeru, the encircling mountain ranges, the abodes of the gods, Indra, Brahmā, Vaśavartin, Śuddhāvāsa, and the classes of gods and asuras, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light with his light, color, brilliance, and glory in the same way as, for example, a strong sun or the disk of a full moon in a clear sky.
 So too the Lord stood out towering over as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east with his light, color, brilliance, and glory. Similarly the Lord stood out towering over as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions, and below and above—in each of the ten directions—shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light with his light, color, brilliance, and glory in the same way as, for example, Sumeru, the king of mountains, stands out towering over all mountains, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light; or in the same way as, for example, the disk of the moon towers over all the stars, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light; or in the same way as, for example, the disk of the sun  stands out towering over all other lights, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light. So too the Lord stands out towering over world systems in the ten directions with their gods, Indras, Brahmās, Śuddhāvāsas, and the classes of gods and humans, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light with his light, color, brilliance, and glory.
 Thereupon the Lord exhibited an ordinary bodily form, like that of beings in the great billionfold world system. Then in the great billionfold world system all the gods, from the gods of the Śuddhāvāsa class down to the Brahmakāyika, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Nirmāṇarati, Tuṣita, Yāma, Trāyastriṃśa, and Cāturmahā­rājika gods saw the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough. Feeling contented, pleased, delighted, joyful, and joyous, with such mental happiness they took celestial flowers, celestial garlands, celestial incense, celestial creams, celestial powders, and celestial perfumes; celestial blue lotuses, lotuses, red lotuses, white lotuses, nalina lilies and saugandhaka lilies; celestial flowers, nāgavṛkṣa flowers, and tamāla leaves; and celestial robes, celestial jewelry, celestial parasols, flags, and banners and approached the Lord. Those humans to be trained, in the form of recipients seated in the great billionfold world system, saw the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough, took land and water flowers, and approached the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough.  Both gods and humans then strewed near, strewed in front, and strewed all around the body of the Tathāgata these celestial flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, banners, and land and water flowers. 
 By the sustaining power of the Lord all this rain of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, banners, and land and water flowers that was strewed down on the Lord stayed there like a second story made of flowers and so on, with the dimensions of the great billionfold world system, in the sky right above the Lord’s head. And from this second story tassels made of celestial flowers and silk were suspended, hanging there, hanging right there, and these tassels made of celestial flowers and silk made the great billionfold world system look very beautiful. And the brightly shining golden color of the Lord streaming forth in the ten directions pervaded and lit up as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each direction. This thought then occurred to each of the gods and humans in all the Jambudvīpa world systems in the great billionfold world system: “The Tathāgata is seated in front of us teaching the Dharma.” Similarly, this thought occurred to the gods in the Godānīyas to the west, Videhas to the east, and Kurus to the north, to the Cāturmahā­rājika gods up to the Akaniṣṭha gods, and similarly to all thegods and humans in a thousandfold [four-continent] world system, in a millionfold world system, or in a great billionfold world system:  “The Tathāgata is seated in front of us teaching the Dharma.”
 Thereupon the Lord, seated on this very lion throne, smiled once again. Through the illumination from that smile the great billionfold world system was lit up, and all the beings seated in the great billionfold world system saw the Lord Buddha, together with his śrāvaka saṅgha, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east. And all those beings seated in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east saw the Lord Śākyamuni, together with his community of monks, in this Sahā world system.
 Similarly, the beings included in this Sahā world system saw the Lord Buddha, together with his śrāvaka saṅgha, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above. And all those beings seated in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River as well saw this Sahā world system and the Lord Śākyamuni, together with his community of monks.
 In the east, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, at the very limit of these world systems, there is a world system called Ratnāvatī. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Ratnākara now dwells and maintains himself. He teaches to the bodhisattvas this very perfection of wisdom.  Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Samantaraśmi saw this great illumination, this great shaking of the earth, and the body of the Lord you can never see enough, and he approached the lord Ratnākara, the tathāgata, and inquired of the tathāgata Ratnākara, “What is the cause, O Lord, what is the reason for this great illumination having manifested in the world, and for this great shaking of the earth, and for the presence of the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough?”
 The lord Ratnākara replied to the bodhisattva Samantaraśmi, “There is, child of a good family, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the western direction, a world system called Sahā. There the tathāgata Śākyamuni now dwells and maintains himself, also teaching the Dharma to the bodhisattvas. This sort of thing is his power.”
 Then the bodhisattva Samantaraśmi said to the tathāgata Ratnākara, “I will go to that Sahā world system to see, salute, and honor that tathāgata Śākyamuni, and to see those bodhisattva great beings, for the most part in the form of the young, who have acquired the dhāraṇīs and detailed and thorough knowledges and acquired mastery over all the meditative stabilizations and absorptions.”
The Lord replied, “Go then, child of a good family, since you feel that now is the right time.”
 Thereupon the tathāgata Ratnākara gave the bodhisattva Samantaraśmi  a thousand lotuses made of manifold jewels, each with a thousand petals shining like gold, saying, “Child of a good family, strew these lotuses over the tathāgata Śākyamuni. Be on your best behavior in that buddhafield. And why? Because the bodhisattvas born in that Sahā world system are difficult to approach.” 
 Thereupon the bodhisattva Samantaraśmi received from the tathāgata Ratnākara the lotuses made of manifold jewels, each with a thousand petals shining like gold. Surrounded by, and at the head of, many hundred thousand one hundred million billion bodhisattvas, householders and renunciates, young men and women, he disappeared together with them from that buddhafield and, having respected, revered, honored, and worshiped as many lords as there are dwelling and maintaining themselves in the east with flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, arrived there in the Sahā world through that bodhisattva’s great wonder-working and that bodhisattva’s great power. He approached the tathāgata Śākyamuni, went up to him, bowed to the Lord’s feet with his head, and stood to one side. The bodhisattva Samantaraśmi then addressed the Lord, the tathāgata Śākyamuni: “The lord Ratnākara inquires about the Lord’s health, hopes that the Lord is well and free from sickness, alert and buoyant, eating well, strong, and comfortable.  The lord Ratnākara has also dispatched these lotuses for the Lord.”
 The lord tathāgata Śākyamuni accepted the lotuses and threw them back to the lord buddhas in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east. Those lotuses spread throughout those world systems, and on them were seated buddha bodies. In those buddhafields they taught Dharma—this very teaching of Dharma associated with the six perfections. And the beings who heard that Dharma became certain to reach unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Thereupon those bodhisattvas, the householders and renunciates, young men and women, each one by virtue of his or her own wholesome roots, respected, revered, honored, and worshiped the lord Śākyamuni and sat down on one side.
 Then in the south, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, at the very limit of these world systems, there is a world system called Sarva­śokāpagata. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Aśokaśrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Vigatāśoka and so on. Connect to the previous, at length, up to and sat down on one side.
 Then in the west there is a world system called Upaśānta. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Ratnārcis now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Cāritramati and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.
 Then in the north  there is a world system called Jayā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Jayendra now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Jayadatta and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.
 Then in the intermediate northeast direction there is a world system called Samādhyalaṃkṛtā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Samādhi­hastyuttara­śrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Vijayavikrāmin and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.
 Then in the intermediate southeast direction there is a world system called Bodhi­maṇḍalālaṃkāra­su­rucitā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Padmottaraśrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Padmahasta and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.
 Then in the intermediate southwest direction there is a world system called Vigata­rajasaṃcayā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Sūrya­maṇḍala­prabhāsottara­śrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Sūrya­pratibhāsa and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.
 Then in the intermediate northwest direction there is a world system called Vaśībhūtā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly  complete buddha Ekachattra now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Ratnottama and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.
 Then in the direction below there is a world system called Padmā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Padmaśrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Padmottama and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.
 Then in the direction above, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, at the very limit of these world systems, there is a world system called Nandā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Nandaśrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Nandadatta, saw this great illumination, this great shaking of the earth, and the body of the Lord you can never see enough, and he approached the lord Nandaśrī, the tathāgata, and inquired of the tathāgata Nandaśrī, “What is the cause, O Lord, what is the reason for this great illumination being manifested in the world, and for this great shaking of the earth, and for the presence of the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough?”
 The lord Nandaśrī replied to the bodhisattva Nandadatta, “There is, O child of a good family, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the direction below a world system called Sahā. There the tathāgata arhat, perfectly  complete buddha Śākyamuni now dwells and maintains himself, also teaching the Dharma to the bodhisattvas. This sort of thing is his power.”
 Then the bodhisattva Nandadatta said to the tathāgata Nandaśrī, “I will go to that Sahā world system to see, salute, and honor that tathāgata Śākyamuni, and to see those bodhisattva great beings, for the most part in the form of the young, who have acquired the dhāraṇīs and detailed and thorough knowledges and have acquired mastery over all the meditative stabilizations and absorptions.”
 The Lord replied, “Go then, child of a good family, since you feel that now is the right time.”
 Thereupon the tathāgata Nandaśrī gave the bodhisattva Nandadatta a thousand lotuses made of manifold jewels, each with a thousand petals shining like gold, saying, “These lotuses, child of a good family, strew over the tathāgata Śākyamuni. Be on your best behavior in that buddhafield. And why? Because the bodhisattvas born in that Sahā world system are difficult to approach.” 
 Thereupon the bodhisattva Nandadatta received from the tathāgata Nandaśrī the lotuses made of manifold jewels, each with a thousand petals shining like gold. Surrounded by and at the head of many hundred thousand one hundred million billion bodhisattvas, householders and renunciates, and young men and women, he disappeared together with them from that buddhafield, and, having respected, revered, honored, and worshiped as many lords as there are dwelling and maintaining themselves in the direction above  with flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, arrived there in the Sahā world through that bodhisattva’s great wonder-working and that bodhisattva’s great power. He approached the tathāgata Śākyamuni, went up to him, bowed to the Lord’s feet with his head, and stood to one side. The bodhisattva Nandadatta then addressed the lord, the tathāgata Śākyamuni: “The lord Nandaśrī inquires about the Lord’s health, hopes that the Lord is well and free from sickness, alert and buoyant, eating well, strong, and comfortable. The lord Nandaśrī has also dispatched these lotuses for the Lord.”
 The lord tathāgata Śākyamuni accepted the lotuses and threw them back to the lords, the buddhas in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the direction above. Those lotuses spread throughout those world systems, and on them were seated buddha bodies. In those buddhafields they demonstrated Dharma—this very demonstration of Dharma associated with the perfection of wisdom. And the beings who heard that Dharma became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Thereupon those bodhisattvas, the householders and renunciates, young men and women, each one by virtue of his or her own wholesome roots respected,  revered, honored, and worshiped the lord Śākyamuni and sat down on one side.
 Thereupon, at that moment, minute, and second, the great billionfold world system became constituted of jewels, filled with various blossoms, hung with clusters of silk streamers, made fragrant with incense pots, and beautified with wish-fulfilling trees whose stem-tips bend down with ornaments and fruit, and with flower trees, fruit trees, fragrance trees, flower-garland trees, and powder trees, just like Padmavatī, the buddhafield of the tathāgata Samantakusuma where Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta lives, as well as the god Susthitamati, and others who are magnificent bodhisattva great beings.
This was the first chapter, “Introduction,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 2: Production of the Thought
When the Lord understood that the world with its celestial beings, Māras and Brahmās, śramaṇas and brahmins, gods and humans, as well as bodhisattvas, most of them in youthful form, had assembled, he said to venerable Śāriputra, “Here, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom.” 
 The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra inquired of him, “How then, Lord,  should bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms make an effort at the perfection of wisdom?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom by way of not taking their stand on it, should complete the perfection of giving by way of not giving up anything, because a gift, a giver, and a recipient are not apprehended. They should also complete the perfection of morality because no downfall is incurred and no compounded downfall is incurred, the perfection of patience because there is no disturbance, the perfection of perseverance because there is no physical or mental effort expended, the perfection of concentration because there is no experience, and the perfection of wisdom because all phenomena are not apprehended. 
 “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom, should perfect the four applications of mindfulness because mindfulness cannot be apprehended, and they should perfect the four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path. They should cultivate the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization. They should cultivate the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions,  and nine perceptions. What are the nine? The nine perceptions are the perception of a bloated corpse, the perception of it chopped in half, the perception of it as putrid, the bloodied perception, the black-and-blue perception, the savaged perception, the torn-asunder perception, the bones perception, and the burnt-bones perception. They should cultivate mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of morality, mindfulness of giving away, and mindfulness of the gods. They should cultivate mindfulness of breathing in and out, mindfulness of disgust, mindfulness of death, and mindfulness of what is included in the body. They should perfect the perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering, the perception of selflessness, the perception of the unclean, the perception of death, the perception that there is no delight in the entire world, and the perception that there is nothing to trust in the entire world; knowledge of suffering, knowledge of origination, knowledge of cessation, knowledge of the path, knowledge of extinction, knowledge of nonproduction, knowledge of dharma, subsequent realization knowledge, conventional knowledge, knowledge of mastery, and knowledge in accord with sound; and meditative stabilization with applied and sustained thought, meditative stabilization without applied thought but with sustained thought, meditative stabilization without either applied or sustained thought, what one does not understand, the faculty of understanding, the faculty of having understood, the stations of mastery, the stations of complete immersion, the four ways of gathering a retinue, the four presentations, the ten levels and ten practices, the ten forbearances,  the twenty surpassing aspirations, the knowledge of a knower of all, the knowledge of calm abiding and insight, the three knowledges, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the four fearlessnesses, the five undiminished clairvoyances, the six perfections, the six principles of being liked, the seven riches, the eight ways great persons think, the nine places beings live, the ten tathāgata powers, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, and great compassion. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to the knowledge, furnished with the best of all aspects, of a knower of all aspects, who want to perfect the knowledge of all path aspects, who want to perfect all-knowledge, and who want to perfect the knowledge of the aspects of the thought activity of all beings should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to destroy all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Śāriputra, thus should bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, who want to pass beyond the level of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, who want to stand on the irreversible level, who want to know the activity and continual movement of the thoughts of all beings, who want to surpass the knowledge of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, who want to acquire the dhāraṇī gateways, and who want to surpass gift-giving to all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing  should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to surpass the morality of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to surpass the meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to surpass the concentrations, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings who, for the sake of all beings, want giving even a little gift to become immeasurable and incalculable by turning it over to all-knowledge with skillful means should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who, for the sake of all beings, want even the little morality they have guarded, the little patience they have developed, the little effort they have exerted, the little concentration they have become absorbed in, and the little wisdom they have developed to become immeasurable and incalculable by turning them over to all-knowledge with skillful means should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings  practicing the perfection of giving should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to thoroughly establish a buddha’s body should train in the perfection of wisdom. If they want to acquire the thirty-two major marks and the eighty minor signs of a great person, they should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be born in the buddha’s line should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to step onto the heir apparent’s level, and want never to be without the buddhas and bodhisattvas, should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, were bodhisattva great beings to feel this longing—‘May I be richly endowed with the wholesome roots with which I will respect, revere, honor, and worship the tathāgatas, the worthy ones, the perfectly complete lord buddhas’—they should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to satisfy all the desires of all beings with requirements such as food, drink, flowers, perfume, garments, flower garlands, incense, powders, creams, bedding, seats, houses, money, grain, medicines for relief of sickness, ornaments, jewels, gems, beryl, conch shells, crystals, corals, parks, and kingdoms should train in the perfection of wisdom. Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to establish all beings in a world as vast as the dharma-constituent and as far reaching as the space element in the perfection of giving, and who want to establish them in the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom, should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to make a single wholesome thought of awakening inexhaustible until reaching complete awakening at the site of awakening should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who think, ‘May the buddhas in the ten directions praise me,’ should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want,  through a single production of the thought, to approach as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want, through a single production of the thought, to approach as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, and below and above, should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want by uttering a single sound to instruct as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want by uttering a single sound to instruct as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, and below and above, should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to ensure that the line of buddhas will be unbroken should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to stand in inner emptiness should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to stand in outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, great emptiness, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of the compounded, the emptiness of the uncompounded, the emptiness of what transcends limits, the emptiness of no beginning and no end, the emptiness of nonrepudiation, the emptiness of a basic nature, the emptiness of all dharmas, the emptiness of its own mark, the emptiness of not apprehending, the emptiness of a nonexistent thing, the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend the suchness of all dharmas, the suchness of the dharma-constituent, and the suchness of the very limit of reality should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to know how many tiny particles of earth there are in the great billionfold world system; who want to know the tiny particles of water  in the oceans, torrents, lakes, ponds, wells, and rivulets; who want to know the tiny particles of fire; and who want to know the tiny particles of wind in all the world systems in the great billionfold world system should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to blow out with one puff of breath the fire in the great billionfold world system when the eon is burning up should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to blunt with the tip of one finger the force of the whirling, shaking circle of wind as it is circulating in the great billionfold world system, rocking, scattering, and pervasively shaking every mountain and the entire earth starting with the axial mountain Sumeru, the great Sumeru, the encircling mountain ranges, and the great encircling mountain ranges should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings thinking, ‘I should toss immeasurable world systems by bundling up every mountain there is in the great billionfold world system—the axial mountain Sumeru, the great Sumeru, the encircling mountain ranges, the great encircling mountain ranges, and so on—with a single strand of hair,’ should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want their single cross-legged posture to expand into and fill up the space of the great billionfold world system in its entirety should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings  who want with a single begging bowl to distribute food to each of the lord buddhas, together with their śrāvaka saṅghas, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east should train in the perfection of wisdom; and similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to respect, want to revere, want to honor, and want to worship those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas with clouds of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands of flowers, creams, aromatic powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want with a single alms bowl to distribute food to each of the lord buddhas, together with their śrāvaka saṅghas, in each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, and below and above, and similarly want to respect, want to revere, want to honor, and want to worship with clouds of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands of flowers, creams, aromatic powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and streamers those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to establish beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east in the aggregate of morality; who want to establish them in  the aggregate of meditative stabilization, in the aggregate of wisdom, in the aggregate of liberation, and in the aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation; and similarly want to establish them in the result of stream enterer, once-returner, and non-returner, in the state of a worthy one, in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, up to in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind should train in the perfection of wisdom. As with the east, also connect this with as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, and below and above.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should know, when giving a gift, that having given such a gift there is a great result: having given such a gift, they will be born in great sāla tree–like royal families, and similarly in great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and in great sāla tree–like business families; having given such a gift they will be born among the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, and similarly, born among the gods of Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, and Nirmāṇarati; having given such a gift, they will reach the first concentration, and similarly reach the second concentration and the third concentration; having given such a gift they will reach the fourth concentration; having given such a gift they will reach the station of the nonperception absorption; having given such a gift they will reach  the station of the endless-space absorption, and similarly, having given such a gift, they will reach the station of endless consciousness and the station of the nothing-at-all absorption; having given such a gift they will reach the station of the neither perception nor nonperception absorption; and having given such a gift they will acquire the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and similarly they will reach the result of stream enterer, and reach the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the state of a worthy one. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should know that a gift thus given with skillful means completes the perfection of giving, and similarly completes the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra then inquired of him, “How, Lord, does the perfection of giving become complete when bodhisattva great beings are giving a gift? How do the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom become complete when bodhisattva great beings are giving a gift?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, the perfection of giving is completed by way of the purity of the three spheres, not apprehending a gift, giver, or recipient; the perfection of morality is completed because no downfall is incurred and no compounded downfall is incurred;  the perfection of patience is completed because of not being disturbed; the perfection of perseverance is completed because of not expending physical or mental effort; the perfection of concentration is completed because of not being distracted and not constructing any ideas; and the perfection of wisdom is completed by way of not apprehending the knowledge of all dharmas. Thus, Śāriputra, when bodhisattvas give a gift like that, the six perfections are completed. Similarly all six perfections are completed in the perfection of morality, and similarly all six perfections are completed in the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to acquire all the buddha qualities of the past, future, and present lord buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to transcend all compounded and uncompounded phenomena should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend the suchness of all past, future, and present dharmas, and similarly, who want to reach the dharma-constituent, the limit of the absence of production, should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be foremost among śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas  should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be attendants of the lord buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be in the inner circle of the lord buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be in the inner retinue of the lord buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to have a large retinue should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to purify a donation should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to stop miserly thoughts should train in the perfection of wisdom, and similarly, those who want to prevent immoral thoughts from arising, who want to prevent malicious thoughts from arising, who want to quit having lazy thoughts, who want to quit having distracted thoughts, and who want to quit having confused thoughts should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to establish all beings in the bases of meritorious action arisen from giving, and who want to establish all beings in the bases of meritorious action arisen from morality, arisen from meditation, that accompany service, and arisen from material things should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to produce the five eyes should train in the perfection of wisdom. And what are the five eyes? They are  the flesh eye, divine eye, wisdom eye, dharma eye, and buddha eye. If they want to produce them, they should train in the perfection of wisdom. Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to see with their divine eye as many buddhas and lords as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east should train in the perfection of wisdom, and similarly, if they want to see with their divine eye as many buddhas and lords as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest and northwest, and below and above they should train in the perfection of wisdom. If they want to hear with their divine ear the doctrine those buddhas and lords explain they should train in the perfection of wisdom, and if they want to comprehend with their mind the thought of those buddhas and lords exactly as it is they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to hear the entire doctrine that the lord buddhas in all world systems in all ten directions explain, and having heard it take it up perfectly by applying the power of memory uninterruptedly, and who do not want any to be lost up until they awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to see the buddhafields of past buddhas and lords, and of future buddhas and lords as well, and who want to see the buddhafields of present buddhas and lords now dwelling and maintaining themselves  in world systems in all ten directions should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to master all that the tathāgatas have taught in discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, verses, summaries, introductions, accounts, birth stories, expanded texts, marvels, tales, and expositions, and what has not been heard by śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to take up all that the lord buddhas in the eastern direction have said, are saying, and will say, who want to bear it in mind, who want to read it aloud, and similarly who want to practice it and want to elaborate upon it in detail for others, should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they want to take up all that the lord buddhas in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, have said, are saying, and will say, want to bear it in mind, want to read it aloud, and similarly want to practice it and want to elaborate upon it in detail for others, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to shine down on the blinding darkness where the sun and moon do not shine,  in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they want to shine light down on the blinding darkness where the sun and moon do not shine, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to proclaim to all the beings born in various buddhafields in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River the word Buddha, the word Dharma, and the word Saṅgha, and who want to establish them in right view, should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to proclaim the words Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha and establish in right view beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, where there is no sound of the words Buddha, Dharma, Saṅgha, or right view, should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want beings who are blind, in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, to see shapes with their eyes through their might should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly,  thinking, ‘May those who are deaf hear sounds with their ears, those who have gone mad regain their senses, the naked be clothed, hungry beings have their fill, the thirsty quench their thirst, beings who are stuck in terrible forms of life be freed from all the terrible forms of life and gain birth as humans, and may I establish the immoral in the aggregate of morality’; and similarly, thinking, ‘May I establish those who are not stabilized in meditation in the aggregate of meditative stabilization, in the aggregate of wisdom, in the aggregate of liberation, and in the aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation’; and thinking, ‘May I establish those who do not see the truths in the result of stream enterer’; and thinking, ‘May I establish them in the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ they should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want beings who are blind, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, to see shapes with their eyes through their might should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, thinking, ‘May those who are deaf hear sounds with their ears, those who have gone mad regain their senses, the naked be clothed, hungry beings have their fill, the thirsty quench their thirst, beings who are stuck in terrible forms of life be freed from all the terrible forms of life and gain birth as humans, and may I establish the immoral in the aggregate of morality’; and similarly, thinking, ‘May I establish those who are not stabilized in meditation in the aggregate of meditative stabilization,  in the aggregate of wisdom, in the aggregate of liberation, and in the aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation’; and thinking, ‘May I establish those who do not see the truths in the result of stream enterer’; and thinking, ‘May I establish them in the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to train in the tathāgatas’ way of carrying themselves should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this: ‘When, oh when, will I look down as an elephant looks? How will it come to be that I will walk on the earth without my feet touching it by the measure of four fingers?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will it come to be that I, surrounded by and at the head of many hundred thousand one hundred million billion Cāturmahā­rājika gods, and Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmapurohita, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, Śuddhāvāsa, Sudṛśa, Sudarśana, Avṛha, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha gods, go forth to the site of awakening?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will it come to be that the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha class, spread out my seat at the root of the tree at the site of awakening?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will it come to be that this region of the earth on which I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and walk, stand, sit, or lie down, become all diamond?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will it come to be that on that very day that I go forth I will fully awaken, on that very day, to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and, having fully awakened on that very day, that I will turn the wheel of the Dharma so that, having turned it, dust-free and stainless, the Dharma eye of countless beings beyond measure will become clear about the dharmas, countless beings beyond measure will stop appropriating anything and their minds will become freed from outflows, and countless beings beyond measure will not turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will I come to have a community of countless śrāvakas beyond measure? How through my one single teaching of the Dharma will countless beings beyond measure  become worthy ones in one sitting, become bodhisattvas in one sitting, become bodhisattvas who will not turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? How will I come to have an infinite community of bodhisattvas, a measure of life that is infinite, and infinite splendid light?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Bodhisattva great beings thinking, ‘How will there come to be not even the sound of the words greed, hatred, and confusion in any way at all in that buddhafield where I fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’ should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Bodhisattva great beings thinking, ‘How will all beings in that buddhafield where I fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening come to be endowed with the form of wisdom that knows “giving is good, discipline is good, restraint is good, celibacy is good, nonviolence toward all creatures and spirits is good”?; bodhisattva great beings thinking, ‘After I have passed into complete nirvāṇa, how will it come to be that there are not even the words disappearance of the good Dharma?’; bodhisattva great beings thinking, ‘How will it come to be that just from hearing my name beings present in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River become assured of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’—they should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Śāriputra, at the time a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom produces these good qualities, then the Four Mahārājas  present in the great billionfold world system are enraptured and think as follows: ‘Just as the Four Mahārājas of yore presented begging bowls to the tathāgatas, the worthy ones, the perfectly complete buddhas of yore, we too will present four begging bowls to this bodhisattva, this great being.’ The Trāyastriṃśa gods, along with the Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods, are enraptured as well and think, ‘With this the hosts of asuras will decline and the hosts of gods will flourish, so we will make attendants available for this bodhisattva, this great being.’ And the gods in the great billionfold world system, from the Mahābrahmās and Brahmakāyika, and all the Brahmās up to Akaniṣṭha, are enraptured and think, ‘We will request this bodhisattva, this great being, awakened to complete awakening, to turn the wheel of the Dharma.’
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, at the time a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom prospers with the six perfections, the sons and daughters of good families are enraptured as well and think, ‘Let us become the mother and father, wife, son, friend, kinsman, and blood relative of that great being.’ The Four Māhārājas and the Trāyastriṃśa gods, as well as the gods up to the Akaniṣṭha gods, are enraptured and think, ‘In order to  definitely join beings to awakening the bodhisattva great being is celibate, not conjoined with the qualities that fetter.’ They make the prayer, ‘Starting from when I first produce the thought of awakening, I will be celibate, I will not be noncelibate. And why? Because pursuing sense objects becomes a block even to birth in the world of Brahmā, so it goes without saying it is a block to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Therefore, having gone forth to homelessness, I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening just as a celibate person, not as a noncelibate person.’ Hence, they shun sexual intercourse.”
 The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra then asked him, “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings definitely have to be with parents, wives, sons, friends, kinsmen, and blood relatives?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, some bodhisattva great beings definitely come with parents, a wife, and sons. Some bodhisattva great beings embrace celibacy starting from when they first produce the thought of awakening, always remaining unmarried persons practicing the bodhisattva practices until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Some bodhisattva great beings, through skillful means, in order to bring beings to maturity, make use of the five sorts of sense objects and then go forth from the harem and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Śāriputra, some bodhisattva great beings gain a standing in the deep perfection of wisdom and, separated from the desire realm afflictions, in order to bring beings to maturity, make a show of taking to the five sorts of sense objects, but they do not make use of them. To illustrate, Śāriputra, a clever, well-trained magician or magician’s apprentice with knowledge of magic spells and magic performance conjures up the five sorts of sense objects and makes a show of themselves dallying with, enjoying, and acting gratified by the five sorts of sense objects. What do you think, Śāriputra, does that magician or magician’s apprentice make use of those five sorts of sense objects?”
 “No, Lord,” Śāriputra replied.
 “Similarly, Śāriputra,” said the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings, through skillful means, make use of those five sorts of sense objects in order to bring beings to maturity, and still those bodhisattva great beings are not contaminated by those sense objects. Alternatively, bodhisattva great beings speak disparagingly of sense objects: ‘Sense objects are ablaze, disgusting, murderous, and against you.’ So, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings take to these sorts of sense objects in order to bring beings to maturity.”
This was the second chapter, “Production of the Thought,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 3: Designation
Then  venerable Śāriputra inquired of the Lord, “Lord, how then should bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not, even while they are bodhisattvas, see a bodhisattva. They do not see even the word bodhisattva. They do not see awakening either, and they do not see the perfection of wisdom. They do not see that ‘they practice,’ and they do not see that ‘they do not practice.’ They also do not see that ‘while practicing they practice and while not practicing do not practice,’ and they also do not see that ‘they do not practice, and do not not practice as well.’ They do not see form. Similarly, they do not see feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness either. And why? Because, Śāriputra, the name bodhisattva is empty of the intrinsic nature of a name. The name bodhisattva is not empty because of emptiness. A bodhisattva is also empty of the intrinsic nature of a bodhisattva, but a bodhisattva is not empty because of emptiness. Awakening, too, is empty of the intrinsic nature of awakening, but awakening is not empty because of emptiness. The perfection of wisdom, too, is empty of the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom, but the perfection of wisdom is not empty because of emptiness. Form, too, is empty of the intrinsic nature of form, but form is not empty because of emptiness.  And feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is also empty of the intrinsic nature of consciousness, but consciousness is not empty because of emptiness. And why? Because the emptiness of the name bodhisattva is not the name bodhisattva, and there is no name bodhisattva apart from emptiness, because the name bodhisattva itself is emptiness and emptiness is the name bodhisattva as well. The emptiness of the bodhisattva is not the bodhisattva and there is no bodhisattva apart from emptiness, because the bodhisattva is emptiness and emptiness is the bodhisattva as well. The emptiness of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom and there is no perfection of wisdom apart from emptiness, because the perfection of wisdom itself is emptiness and emptiness is the perfection of wisdom as well. The emptiness of form is not form and there is no form apart from emptiness, because form itself is emptiness and emptiness is form as well. And the emptiness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not consciousness, and there is no consciousness apart from emptiness because consciousness itself is emptiness and emptiness is consciousness as well. And why? Because this—namely, bodhisattva—is just a name; because these—namely, the name bodhisattva, awakening, the perfection of wisdom, form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness—are just names; and because this—namely, emptiness—is just a name. Why? Because where there is no intrinsic nature there is no production, stopping, decrease, increase, defilement, or purification. And why? Because form is like an illusion, feeling is like an illusion, perception is like an illusion, volitional factors are like an illusion, and consciousness is like an illusion. And an illusion is just a name that does not reside somewhere, does not reside in a particular place, so the sight of an illusion is mistaken and does not exist and is devoid of an intrinsic nature. Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that do not see production, do not see stopping, do not see standing, do not see decrease, do not see increase, do not see defilement, and do not see purification in any dharma at all. They do not see ‘awakening,’ and they do not see a ‘bodhisattva’ anywhere. And why? Because names are made up. In the case of each of these different dharmas they are imagined, unreal, names plucked out of thin air working subsequently as conventional labels, and just as they are subsequently conventionally labeled, so too are they settled down on as real. Bodhisattva  great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see any of those names as inherently existing, and because they do not see them, they do not settle down on them as real. 
 “Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom think, ‘This bodhisattva is just a name. This awakening is just a name. This awakened one is just a name. This perfection of wisdom is just a name. This practicing the perfection of wisdom is just a name.’ They think, ‘This form is just a name, and these—feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness—are just names.’
 “For example, Śāriputra, ‘self’ is said again and again but a self cannot be apprehended; a being, a soul, and a person cannot be apprehended either. Thus they work conventionally as what has been designated by a name, yet they cannot be apprehended at all, because of the emptiness of not apprehending. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom also do not see a bodhisattva, they do not see up to consciousness, and they do not see even the names through which they work as conventional labels. So, Śāriputra, setting aside the wisdom of a tathāgata, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom surpass the wisdom of all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas because of the emptiness of not apprehending. And why? Because they do not see what would make them settle down on them as real. So bodhisattva great beings practicing thus, Śāriputra,  are practicing the perfection of wisdom.
 “To illustrate, Śāriputra, if this Jambudvīpa were filled with monks similar in worth to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana—like a thicket of naḍa reeds, or a thicket of bamboo, or a thicket of sugarcane, or a thicket of rushes, or a thicket of rice, or a thicket of sesame—their wisdom would not approach the wisdom of a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom even by a hundredth part, or by a thousandth part, or by a hundred thousandth part; it would not stand up to any number, or fraction, or counting, or example, or comparison. And why? Because, Śāriputra, that wisdom of a bodhisattva great being has been established with the complete nirvāṇa of all beings as the aim.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, even the wisdom cultivated for a single day by a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom surpasses the wisdom of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. Śāriputra, let alone this Jambudvīpa filled with monks similar in worth to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, even if the great billionfold world system were filled with monks similar in worth to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana their wisdom would not approach the wisdom cultivated for a single day by a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom even by a hundredth part, up to it would not stand up to any comparison with it. Śāriputra, let alone the great billionfold world system filled with monks similar in worth to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, Śāriputra, even if as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River  to the east were filled with monks similar in worth to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, and similarly, even if as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above were filled with monks similar in worth to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana, their wisdom would not approach the wisdom cultivated for a single day by a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom even by a hundredth part, up to it would not stand up to any comparison with it.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra said to the Lord, “Lord, the wisdom of śrāvaka stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, all those wisdoms are not broken apart, they are a detachment, are not produced, and are empty of an intrinsic nature; and, Lord, you do not find variation or distinction in something that has not been broken apart, that is a detachment, not produced, and empty of an intrinsic nature. So how, Lord, could the wisdom cultivated for a single day by a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom surpass the wisdom of all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having spoken thus, the Lord asked him, “What do you think, Śāriputra, is the wisdom of all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas concerned with a purpose of the sort that concerns the wisdom cultivated for a single day by a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom furnished with the best of all aspects,  practicing the knowledge of all aspects, working for the welfare of all beings with the thought, ‘I must, having fully awakened to all dharmas in all forms, lead all beings to complete nirvāṇa’?”
 “No, Lord,” Śāriputra replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Śāriputra, do all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas think, ‘We must, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, lead all beings to complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind’?”
 “No, Lord,” Śāriputra replied.
 The Lord said, “You should understand from just this explanation, Śāriputra, that all the wisdom of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas does not approach the wisdom cultivated for a single day by a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom even by a hundredth part, up to it does not stand up to any comparison with it, hence it surpasses the wisdom of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.
 “What do you think, Śāriputra, do all these śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas think, ‘We must, having practiced the six perfections, having brought beings to maturity, having purified a buddhafield, having completed the ten tathāgata powers, having completed the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect,  complete awakening, lead infinite, countless beings beyond measure to complete nirvāṇa’?”
 “No, Lord,” Śāriputra replied.
 “Śāriputra,” said the Lord, “a bodhisattva great being thinks, ‘I must, having practiced the six perfections, having brought beings to maturity, having purified a buddhafield, having fulfilled the ten tathāgata powers, having fulfilled the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and having fully awakened to the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, lead infinite, countless beings beyond measure to complete nirvāṇa.’
 “To illustrate, Śāriputra, just as a firefly-type creature does not think, ‘I should light up Jambudvīpa with my light, I should pervade Jambudvīpa with my light,’ so too, Śāriputra, no śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha thinks, ‘I must, having practiced the six perfections, having brought beings to maturity, having purified a buddhafield, having completed the ten tathāgata powers, having completed the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and having fully awakened to the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, lead infinite, countless beings beyond measure to complete nirvāṇa.’ 
 “Again to illustrate, Śāriputra, just as the circle of the sun, when it rises, lights up all Jambudvīpa  with its light and pervades all Jambudvīpa with its light, so too, Śāriputra, a bodhisattva great being, having practiced the six perfections, having brought beings to maturity, having purified a buddhafield, having completed the ten tathāgata powers, having completed the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and having fully awakened to the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, leads infinite, countless beings beyond measure to complete nirvāṇa.”
 The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra then asked him, “How, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings, having passed beyond the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level, reach the irreversible bodhisattva level and practice the bodhisattva path?” 
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings, from their first production of the thought of awakening onward, stand in the dharmas of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness while practicing the six perfections, and, having passed beyond the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level, reach the irreversible bodhisattva level.”
 The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra asked him further, “Standing on which level, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings become worthy of the offerings of all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked this, the Lord said to him,  “Śāriputra, in the interval from their first production of the thought up to the site of awakening, bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections are constantly and always worthy of the offerings of all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. And why? Because, Śāriputra, it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that all wholesome dharmas appear in the world, that is, that the ten wholesome actions, the morality with five branches, the morality with eight branches, and the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, four noble truths, four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path appear in the world; and that the six perfections, the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to great love, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha appear in the world. And it is because those wholesome dharmas appear in the world that there are great sāla tree–like royal families in the world, great sāla tree–like brahmin families in the world, and great sāla tree–like business families in the world; that there are the Cāturmahā­rājika gods and gods of the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmapurohita, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara,  Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, Asaṃjñisattva, Śuddhāvāsa—Sudṛśa, Sudarśana, Avṛha, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha—and the Ākāśānantyāyatana, Vijñānānantyāyatana, Ākiṃcityāyatana, and Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana; that stream enterers appear in the world, and that once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattva great beings, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas appear in the world.” 
 “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings purify the offering, or do they not do so?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings metaphorically purify the offering. And why? Because, Śāriputra, a bodhisattva great being’s offering is absolutely pure. Thus, Śāriputra, a bodhisattva great being is a giver, but a giver of what? A giver of wholesome dharmas. A giver of which wholesome dharmas? A giver of these: the ten wholesome actions, the five-point training, the eight-branched confession and restoration, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.” 
 “Lord, how are bodhisattva great beings who engage with the perfection of wisdom ‘engaged’?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “here  bodhisattva great beings engaged with the emptiness of form are ‘engaged.’ Similarly, engaged with the emptiness of feelings, the emptiness of perceptions, the emptiness of volitional factors, and the emptiness of consciousness, they are engaged. Furthermore, Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings engaged with the emptiness of the eyes are engaged. Similarly, engaged with the emptiness of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind they are engaged. When they are engaged with the emptiness of a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma they are engaged. When they are engaged with the emptiness of the eye consciousness constituent they are engaged. Similarly, engaged with the emptiness of the ear consciousness constituent, nose consciousness constituent, tongue consciousness constituent, body consciousness constituent, and thinking-mind consciousness constituent they are engaged. When they are engaged with the emptiness of suffering they are engaged. When they are engaged with the emptiness of origination, cessation, and the path they are engaged. When they are engaged with the emptiness of ignorance they are engaged. When they are engaged with the emptiness of volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, and old age and death, they are engaged. When they are engaged with the emptiness of all dharmas they are engaged. When they are engaged with the emptiness of all compounded and uncompounded phenomena they are engaged. Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who are engaged with the emptiness of a basic nature are engaged. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who are engaged with these seven emptinesses are engaged. 
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, when those bodhisattvas are practicing the perfection of wisdom with these seven emptinesses you cannot say, first of all, that they ‘are engaged’ or ‘are not engaged.’ And why? Because they do not see form as qualified by production or qualified by stopping. They do not see feelings, perceptions, volitional factors, or consciousness as qualified by production or qualified by stopping. They do not see form as qualified by defilement or qualified by purification. They do not see feelings, perceptions, volitional factors, or consciousness as qualified by defilement or qualified by purification. Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings do not see ‘a confluence of form with feeling,’ or similarly, ‘a confluence of feeling with perception, perception with volitional factors, or volitional factors with consciousness.’ They do not see ‘a confluence of consciousness with volitional factors.’ And why? Because no dharma is in a confluence with any other dharma, because they are empty of a basic nature. And why? Because that emptiness of form is not form, and because that emptiness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not consciousness. And why? Because, Śāriputra, that emptiness of form is not seeable, the emptiness of feeling does not experience, the emptiness of perception does not perceive, the emptiness of volitional factors  does not occasion anything, and the emptiness of consciousness does not make conscious. And why? Because, Śāriputra, form is not one thing and emptiness another; emptiness is not one thing and form another. Form is itself emptiness, and emptiness is form. Similarly, feeling is not one thing and emptiness another; emptiness is not one thing and feeling another. Perception is not one thing and emptiness another; emptiness is not one thing and perception another. Volitional factors are not one thing and emptiness another; emptiness is not one thing and volitional factors another. And consciousness is not one thing and emptiness another; emptiness is not one thing and consciousness another. Consciousness is itself emptiness, and emptiness is consciousness. And why? Because, Śāriputra, that emptiness is not produced and does not stop, is not defiled and is not purified, does not decrease and does not increase, and is not past, is not future, and is not present.
 “In such as that there is no form, there is no feeling, there is no perception, there are no volitional factors, and there is no consciousness. There is no earth element, water element, fire element, or wind element. There is no space element. There is no consciousness element.
 “There is no eye sense field; there is no form sense field. There is no ear sense field; there is no sound sense field. There is no nose sense field; there is no smell sense field. There is no tongue sense field; there is no taste sense field. There is no body sense field; there is no touch sense field. There is no thinking-mind sense field; there is no dharma sense field.
 “There is no eye constituent, there is no form constituent, there is no eye consciousness constituent. There is no ear constituent, there is no sound constituent,  there is no ear consciousness constituent. There is no nose constituent, there is no smell constituent, there is no nose consciousness constituent. There is no tongue constituent, there is no taste constituent, there is no tongue consciousness constituent. There is no body constituent, there is no touch constituent, there is no body consciousness constituent. There is no thinking-mind constituent, there is no dharma constituent, there is no thinking-mind consciousness constituent.
 “There is no ignorance; there is no cessation of ignorance. There are no volitional factors; there is no cessation of volitional factors. There is no consciousness; there is no cessation of consciousness. There is no name and form; there is no cessation of name and form. There are no six sense fields; there is no cessation of the six sense fields. There is no contact; there is no cessation of contact. There is no feeling; there is no cessation of feeling. There is no craving; there is no cessation of craving. There is no appropriation; there is no cessation of appropriation. There is no existence; there is no cessation of existence. There is no birth; there is no cessation of birth. There is no old age and death; there is no cessation of old age and death.
 “There is no suffering. There is no origination. There is no cessation. There is no path. There is no attainment. There is no clear realization. There is no stream enterer; there is no result of stream enterer. There is no once-returner; there is no result of once-returner. There is no non-returner; there is no result of non-returner. There is no worthy one; there is no result of worthy one. There is no pratyekabuddha; there is no pratyekabuddha’s awakening. There is no buddha; there is no awakening. 
 “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that are ‘engaged,’ but they do not see the practice of the perfection of wisdom as either ‘engaged’ or ‘not engaged’ with form.  They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the eyes. They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the ears, nose, tongue, body, or thinking mind. They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with form. They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with sound, smell, taste, feeling, or dharmas. 
 “They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the eye constituent. They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the form constituent. They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the eye consciousness constituent . . . up to . . . They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the thinking-mind constituent, the dharma constituent, or the thinking-mind consciousness constituent. 
 “They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the applications of mindfulness. Similarly, they do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, or the path. They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the four truths. They do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the ten tathāgata powers, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the four fearlessnesses, the five clairvoyances, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, up to they do not see it as either engaged or not engaged with the knowledge of a knower of all aspects furnished with the best of all aspects.
 “Śāriputra, in this way you should know bodhisattva great beings who have engaged in the perfection of wisdom like that  have ‘engaged.’
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom neither cause emptiness to engage with emptiness, nor disengage from it, and the same holds true for the yogic practice of emptiness as well. They neither cause signlessness to engage with nor disengage from signlessness, and the same holds true for the yogic practice of signlessness as well. They neither cause wishlessness to engage with nor disengage from wishlessness, and the same holds true for the yogic practice of wishlessness as well. And why? Because emptiness is neither a yogic practice nor not a yogic practice. Similarly, signlessness and wishlessness are neither yogic practices nor not yogic practices. 
 “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom enter into the emptiness of the marks particular to dharmas, and when they so enter they do not engage with nor disengage from form. Neither do they engage with nor disengage from feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness.
 “They do not joinform with the prior limit, because they do not even see the prior limit. They do not join form with the later limit, because they do not even see the later limit. They do not join form with the present because they do not even see the present. Similarly, they do not join feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness with the prior limit, because they do not even see the prior limit itself. They do not join consciousness with the later limit, because they do not even see  the later limit itself. They do not join consciousness with the present because they do not even see the present itself.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, because of the sameness of the three periods of time, do not join the prior limit with the later limit and do not join the later limit with the prior limit. They do not join the present with the prior limit or the later limit, and they do not join the prior limit or the later limit with the present. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom engage in such a way that they do not join the knowledge of all aspects with the past. How, without even seeing the past itself, could they join it with the past? They do not join the knowledge of all aspects with the future. How, without even seeing the future itself, could they join it with the future? They do not join the knowledge of all aspects with the present. How, without even seeing the present itself, could they join it with the present? Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not join form with the knowledge of all aspects because they do not even see form. Similarly, they do not join feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . .  or consciousness with the knowledge of all aspects either because they do not even see consciousness itself. Similarly, they do not join the eyes with the knowledge of all aspects either because they do not even see the eyes themselves. They do not join the ears . . . nose . . . tongue . . . body . . . or thinking mind with the knowledge of all aspects either because they do not even see the thinking mind itself. Similarly, they do not join a form with the knowledge of all aspects either because they do not even see a form itself. They do not join a sound . . . a smell . . . a taste . . . a feeling . . . or a dharma with the knowledge of all aspects either because they do not even see a dharma itself. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not join the perfection of giving with the knowledge of all aspects because they do not even see the perfection of giving itself. Similarly, they do not join the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . or the perfection of wisdom with the knowledge of all aspects either because they do not even see the perfection of wisdom itself. They do not join the applications of mindfulness with the knowledge of all aspects because they do not even see the applications of mindfulness themselves. Similarly, they do not join the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the five faculties . . . the five powers . . . the seven limbs of awakening . . . the eightfold noble path . . . the ten tathāgata powers . . . the four fearlessnesses . . . the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . .  the five clairvoyances . . . or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha with the knowledge of all aspects either because they do not even see the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha themselves. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not join a buddha with the knowledge of all aspects, and they do not join the knowledge of all aspects with a buddha, because they do not even see a buddha. They do not join awakening with the knowledge of all aspects, and they do not join the knowledge of all aspects with awakening, because they do not even see awakening. And why? Because a buddha is the knowledge of all aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects is the buddha as well. And because awakening itself is the knowledge of all aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects is itself awakening as well. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, while bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, form is not joined with ‘originating.’ Form is not joined with ‘perishing.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘originating.’ Consciousness is not joined with ‘perishing.’ Form is not joined with ‘permanent.’ Form is not joined with ‘impermanent.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘permanent.’ Consciousness is not joined with ‘impermanent.’ Form is not joined with ‘happiness.’ Form is not joined with ‘suffering.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . .  volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘happiness.’ Consciousness is not joined with ‘suffering.’ Form is not joined with ‘self.’ Form is not joined with ‘no self.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘self.’ Consciousness is not joined with ‘no self.’ Form is not joined with ‘calm.’ Form is not joined with ‘not calm.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘calm.’ Consciousness is not joined with ‘not calm.’ Form is not joined with ‘empty.’ Form is not joined with ‘not empty.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘empty.’ Consciousness is not joined with ‘not empty.’ Form is not joined with ‘having a sign.’ Form is not joined with ‘being signless.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘having a sign.’ Consciousness is not joined with ‘being signless.’ Form is not joined with ‘having a wish.’ Form is not joined with ‘being wishless.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘having a wish.’ Consciousness is not joined with ‘being wishless.’ Form is not joined with ‘being produced’ or ‘stopping.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘being produced’ or ‘stopping.’ Form is not joined with ‘the past,’ form is not joined with ‘the future,’ and form is not joined with ‘the present.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘the past,’ consciousness is not joined with ‘the future,’ and consciousness is not joined with ‘the present.’ Form is not joined with ‘strong’ or ‘weak.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . .  volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘strong’ or ‘weak.’ Form is not joined with ‘is’ or ‘is not.’ Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not joined with ‘is’ or ‘is not.’
 “Śāriputra, if bodhisattva great beings do not assert ‘those who practice thus are practicing the perfection of wisdom’; if they do not assert ‘they are not practicing’; if they do not assert ‘they are practicing when they practice and not practicing when they do not practice’; and if they do not assert ‘they are not practicing and not not practicing,’ they are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of the perfection of giving. They do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, or the perfection of wisdom. They do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of the irreversible level. They do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of bringing beings to maturity, for the sake of purifying a buddhafield, for the sake of the ten tathāgata powers, for the sake of the four fearlessnesses, for the sake of the four detailed and thorough knowledges, or for the sake of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of inner emptiness. They do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, great emptiness, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of the compounded, the emptiness of the uncompounded, the emptiness of what transcends limits, the emptiness of no beginning and no end, the emptiness of nonrepudiation, the emptiness of a basic nature, the emptiness of its own mark,  the emptiness of all dharmas, the emptiness of the unproduced, the emptiness of a nonexistent thing, the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, or the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. They do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of suchness, the dharma-constituent, or the very limit of reality. And why? Because bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see a difference in any dharma. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “They do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of divine eyes, for the sake of divine ears, for the sake of knowing others’ thoughts, for the sake of the recollection of past lives, or for the sake of the performance of miraculous power. And why? Because bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that do not even see the perfection of wisdom itself, not to mention a bodhisattva, so however could they apprehend fully all the clairvoyances? Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not think, ‘With my divine eyes I will know the deaths and rebirths of beings established in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. With my divine ears I will listen to their words, I will know their thoughts, and having also recollected their past lives I will go with miraculous power and teach the Dharma.’ Similarly, they do not think, ‘With my divine eyes I will know the deaths and rebirth of beings established in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern,  and northwestern directions, below and above. With my divine ears I will listen to their words, I will know their thoughts, and having also recollected their past lives I will go with miraculous power and teach the Dharma.’ Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “They lead infinite, countless beings to complete nirvāṇa, so, Śāriputra, Māra the wicked one does not gain entry to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like this. All those ordinary afflictive emotions, as many as there are, are destroyed.
 “The lord buddhas in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, as well as the lord buddhas in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, guard the bodhisattva great beings so they will not fall to the śrāvaka level or to the pratyekabuddha level. The Cāturmahā­rājika gods and the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods, and the Brahmakāyika gods up to the Akaniṣṭha gods who are standing there, also guard the bodhisattva great beings so that nothing will draw them toward hindrances. Whatever physical defects they have, in each and every way they become nonexistent in this very life. And why? Because the bodhisattva great beings are filled with a love that extends to all beings.  Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom come face to face, with little difficulty, with the dhāraṇī gateways and the meditative stabilization gateways. In all their births they please the tathāgatas, the worthy ones, the perfectly complete buddhas, and are not separated from the lord buddhas, until fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, it does not occur to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to wonder, ‘Is any phenomenon conjoined with or separated from phenomena, or does it come together with or not come together with them?’ And why? Because they do not see any phenomenon that could be united or separated, or could come together or not come together. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, it does not occur to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to wonder, ‘Will I quickly fully awaken, or not fully awaken to the dharma-constituent?’ And why? Because the dharma-constituent does not fully awaken by means of the dharma-constituent. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  do not see any dharma over and above the dharma-constituent, they do not make a distinction between the dharma-constituent and any dharma, and it does not occur to them to wonder, ‘Will I penetrate into the dharma-constituent, or will I not penetrate into it?’ This is because they do not see any dharma that is the dharma that would come to be penetrated into by means of a dharma, because they do not join the dharma-constituent to ‘empty’ and do not join it to ‘not empty.’ Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaged like that are ‘engaged’ in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not join form to emptiness and do not join emptiness to form. Similarly, they do not join feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness to emptiness and they do not join emptiness to consciousness. Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not join the eye constituent to emptiness and do not join emptiness to the eye constituent; do not join the form constituent to emptiness and do not join emptiness to the form constituent; and do not join the eye consciousness constituent to emptiness and do not join emptiness to the eye consciousness constituent. Similarly, they do not join the ear constituent . . . the sound constituent . . . and the ear consciousness constituent . . . the nose constituent . . . the smell constituent . . . and the nose consciousness constituent . . . the tongue constituent . . . the taste constituent . . . and the tongue consciousness constituent . . . the body constituent . . . the touch constituent . . . and the body consciousness constituent . . . and they do not join the thinking-mind constituent to emptiness and do not join emptiness to the thinking-mind constituent. They do not join the dharma constituent to emptiness and do not join emptiness to the dharma constituent.  They do not join the thinking-mind consciousness constituent to emptiness and do not join emptiness to the thinking-mind consciousness constituent. And why? Because, Śāriputra, this—the yogic practice of emptiness—is the bodhisattva great beings’ ultimate yogic practice. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing emptiness do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, purify a buddhafield, bring beings to maturity, and quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Śāriputra, whatever the bodhisattva great beings’ yogic practices, of them the yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom is the highest, the foremost, the most excellent, the best, the most superb, sublime, and unsurpassed. And why? Because this—the yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom, the yogic practice of emptiness, of singlessness, and of wishlessness—is a yogic practice that is unsurpassed.
 “Śāriputra, you should bear in mind that bodhisattva great beings engaged like that have been prophesied, or are close to being prophesied. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings engaging like that will work for the welfare of infinite, countless beings beyond measure, but it will not occur to them to think, ‘The lord buddhas will make a prophecy about me. I am close to being prophesied. I will purify a buddhafield. I will bring beings to maturity. Having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening I will turn the wheel of the Dharma.’ And why? Because they do not make the dharma-constituent into a causal sign, and  do not see any dharma at all, over and above the dharma-constituent, that is a practice of the perfection of wisdom, or about which the lord buddhas will make a prophecy, or that will become fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Because the notion of a being does not occur to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that. And why? Because a being is absolutely not produced and does not cease, because the true dharmic nature of dharmas is not produced and does not cease. How could what is not produced and does not cease practice the perfection of wisdom? Śāriputra, a bodhisattva great being practicing like that practices the perfection of wisdom as an unproduced and unceasing being, practices the perfection of wisdom as a being who is emptiness, and practices the perfection of wisdom as a being who cannot be apprehended, is in an isolated state, is without a basic nature, and is without an intrinsic nature. Śāriputra, this—the yogic practice of emptiness—is the bodhisattva great beings’ ultimate yogic practice. Śāriputra, this is the bodhisattva great beings’ yogic practice of the practice of the perfection of wisdom that stands surpassing any other yogic practices. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing this yogic practice accomplish the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings standing in this yogic practice do not produce a miserly  thought, and they do not produce an immoral thought, a malicious thought, a lazy thought, a distracted thought, or an intellectually confused thought.”
 The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra then inquired of him, “Where did they die, Lord, bodhisattva great beings dwelling by means of this yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom who have taken birth here? And having died here where will they take birth?” 
 Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, you should know that bodhisattva great beings dwelling by means of this yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom have taken birth here, having died in other buddhafields; or have taken birth here, having died a god of the Tuṣita class; or have taken birth here, having died a human.
 “Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings who have taken birth here, having died in other buddhafields, quickly become absorbed in yogic practice, that is, in this yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom. This deep dharma manifests itself to them even after they have exchanged lives, and afterward they again become absorbed in the yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom. They take birth in whichever buddhafield the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas dwell and maintain themselves, and they please those tathāgatas.
 “Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings who have taken birth here, having died a god of the Tuṣita class, are interrupted by a single birth, and insofar as they have not lost their six perfections, all the dhāraṇī gateways and the meditative stabilization gateways  are brought together in them and are not lost either. 
 “Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings who, having died as humans, have taken birth sharing in the unique good fortune of humans, the faculties of those bodhisattva great beings are dull unless they are bodhisattva great beings who are irreversible from awakening. They do not quickly become absorbed in this yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom, and the dhāraṇī gateways and meditative stabilization gateways do not manifest themselves to them either.
 “Śāriputra, you asked, ‘Where will bodhisattva great beings dwelling by means of this yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom, having died here, take birth?’ Śāriputra, having died in this buddhafield, bodhisattva great beings dwelling by means of this yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom will pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield wherever the lord buddhas dwell and maintain themselves, and until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening they will never be separated from the lord buddhas and will please those lord buddhas.
 “Śāriputra, there are certain bodhisattva great beings without skillful means who become absorbed in the four concentrations and practice the perfections, but even if, having taken birth among the long-lived gods because of their acquisition of the concentrations, they acquire a human birth and please the lord buddhas, they are still those with dull, not keen, faculties.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who become absorbed in the concentrations and practice the perfections but still, without skillful means, relax  the concentrations and so take birth even in the desire realm. Śāriputra, those bodhisattva great beings too are still those with dull, not keen, faculties. 
 “Śāriputra, there are also bodhisattva great beings who become absorbed in the four concentrations, and become absorbed in the four formless absorptions, the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, and the path but still, with great compassion and skillful means do not take birth through the influence of the concentrations and do not take birth through the influence of the four immeasurables or the formless absorptions, but instead take birth wherever the lord buddhas dwell and maintain themselves and, inseparable from this yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening right here in the Fortunate Age.
 “Śāriputra, there are also those bodhisattva great beings who, having produced the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, and the four formless absorptions stop all the concentrations and meditative stabilizations with skillful means, and, taking birth in the desire realms, are born in great sāla tree–like royal families, or in great sāla tree–like brahmin families, or in great sāla tree–like business families. This is not because they want another existence, but they take birth in order to bring beings to maturity.
 “Śāriputra, there are also those bodhisattva great beings who become absorbed in the four concentrations, and become absorbed in the four immeasurables, and the four formless absorptions as well, but with skillful means do not take birth through the influence of the concentrations,  the meditative stabilizations, or the absorptions but instead take birth sharing in the good fortune of the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, or take birth sharing in the good fortune of the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods. Living there they bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield, and please the lord buddhas.
 “Śāriputra, there are also those bodhisattva great beings who practice the six perfections and with skillful means become absorbed in the four concentrations, and become absorbed in the four immeasurables, and the four formless absorptions as well, who, having died here, take birth in the Brahmaloka. Having become brahmās, mahābrahmās, there, standing in those brahmā dwellings they pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to request the tathāgatas to turn the wheel of the Dharma in whichever buddhafield the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Śāriputra, there are also those bodhisattva great beings interrupted by a single birth who practice the six perfections and with skillful means become absorbed in the four concentrations, and become absorbed in the four immeasurables and the four formless absorptions as well, who also cultivate the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, and the path, and become absorbed in the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations, but without taking birth through their influence.  Having pleased the lord buddhas who have manifested themselves, and practiced celibacy there, and having taken birth sharing in the good fortune of the Tuṣita gods, remaining there for as long as they live without their faculties declining, mindful, with introspection, and surrounded by, and at the head of, many hundred thousand one hundred million billion gods, they demonstrate a birth here and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in various buddhafields.
“Śāriputra, there are also those bodhisattva great beings who have acquired the six clairvoyances and do not take birth in the desire realm, do not take birth in the form and formless realms, but passing on from buddhafield to buddhafield they respect, revere, honor, and worship those lord buddhas, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas.
 “Śāriputra, there are also those bodhisattva great beings who have acquired the six clairvoyances and who, sporting by means of the six clairvoyances, pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield—buddhafields where, over and above the Buddha Vehicle, there is not even the sound of the words Śrāvaka Vehicle or Pratyekabuddha Vehicle.
 “Śāriputra, there are also those bodhisattva great beings who have acquired the six clairvoyances and who, sporting by means of the six clairvoyances, pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield—buddhafields where the lifespan of beings is infinite.
 “Śāriputra, there are also those bodhisattva great beings who have acquired the six clairvoyances and who pass on from world system to world system—world systems where there is not even the sound of the word Buddha, of the word Dharma, or of the word Saṅgha, and, having arrived,  there they proclaim the word Buddha, proclaim the word Dharma, and proclaim the word Saṅgha, speaking in praise of the Three Jewels. The word Buddha, the word Dharma, and the word Saṅgha cause those beings, furthermore, to become serenely confident and to take birth, after their death there, where the lord buddhas are dwelling.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who, after producing the first thought of awakening, have acquired the four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions; who cultivate the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and the noble path; and who have acquired the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They do not take birth in the desire realm, do not take birth in the form realm, and do not take birth in the formless realm but work there for the welfare of beings.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who, having entered right from the production of the first thought of awakening into flawlessness, stand on the irreversible level. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who, right from the production of the first thought of awakening, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, turn the wheel of the Dharma, work for the welfare of countless beings beyond measure, and enter into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. Even though they have entered into nirvāṇa, their good Dharma lasts for an eon or more than an eon.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who, right from the production of the first thought,  become absorbed in the yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom and pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield together with many hundred thousand one hundred million billion bodhisattvas in order to see the lord buddhas and in order to bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who practice the six perfections and have acquired the four concentrations, have acquired the four immeasurables, and have acquired the four formless absorptions. They sport with the concentrations, the immeasurables, and the formless absorptions in different ways, that is, they become absorbed in the first concentration and, having emerged from that, become absorbed in the cessation absorption; having emerged from that, they become absorbed in the second concentration, and having emerged from that become absorbed in the cessation absorption; having emerged from that, they become absorbed in the third concentration, and having emerged from that become absorbed in the cessation absorption; having emerged from that, they become absorbed in the fourth concentration, and having emerged from that become absorbed in the cessation absorption; having emerged from that, they become absorbed in the station of endless space, and having emerged from that become absorbed in the cessation absorption; having emerged from that, they become absorbed in the station of endless consciousness, and having emerged from that become absorbed in the cessation absorption; having emerged from that, they become absorbed in the station of nothing-at-all, and having emerged from that become absorbed in the cessation absorption; having emerged from that,  they become absorbed in the station of neither perception nor nonperception, and having emerged from that become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Śāriputra, those bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means become absorbed into those concentrations, immeasurables, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions by leaping above.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who have acquired the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, and the noble path; who have acquired the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; who do not reach the result of stream enterer, and who do not reach the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. They practice the perfection of wisdom and with skillful means cause the mental continuums of beings to be led into the path, cause them to be purified, and cause them to reach the result of stream enterer and to reach the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. Śāriputra, the knowledge that is the cause of reaching the result state of a worthy one and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening is a bodhisattva great being’s forbearance. Śāriputra, you should know those bodhisattva great beings dwelling in this perfection of wisdom are irreversible from awakening. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who make the Tuṣita abode pure. Śāriputra, you should know that they are bodhisattva great beings  of the Fortunate Age.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who acquire the four concentrations, up to who acquire the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They practice in order to understand the four truths but do not penetrate the four truths. Śāriputra, you should know that they are bodhisattva great beings interrupted by a single birth.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who pass on from world system to world system. They cause beings to be led to awakening. They make a buddhafield pure. Śāriputra, you should know that they are bodhisattva great beings who will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening over the course of immeasurable, incalculable eons.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who, ever striving for the sake of beings, never speak an unprofitable word and never do an unprofitable physical, verbal, or mental deed.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections who, ever striving for the sake of beings, pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield, cutting off the path to the terrible forms of life.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who, focusing on the perfection of giving, supply beings with all their requirements for happiness: food for those seeking food and drink for those seeking drink. They supply as appropriate flowers, flower garlands, perfumes, creams, incense,  beds and seats, clothes, ornaments, sustenance, homes, money, grain, jewels, pearls, gold, silver, and coral. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who, focusing on the perfection of morality, establish beings in restraint of body, speech, and mind.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who, focusing on the perfection of patience, establish beings in non-anger and non-malice.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who, focusing on the perfection of perseverance, establish beings in a zeal for all wholesome dharmas. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who, focusing on the perfection of concentration, establish beings in a calm abiding single-pointedness and detachment from sense objects.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who, focusing on the perfection of wisdom, magically produce a body just like the shape a tathāgata assumes and teach the Dharma in order to lead beings in the hells, those in the animal world, and beings in the world of Yama beyond all the terrible forms of life. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who magically produce a body just like the shape a buddha assumes,  betake themselves to as many buddhafields in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, teach the Dharma, attend on the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, listen to the Dharma, see the bodhisattva saṅgha and the array of buddhafield qualities, apprehend the causal signs of those buddhafields and perfect many buddhafields even more expansive and more special than those, perfecting themselves in those buddhafields as bodhisattva great beings interrupted by a single birth. Similarly, they betake themselves to each of as many buddhafields as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, teach the Dharma, attend on the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, listen to the Dharma, see the bodhisattva saṅgha and the array of buddhafield qualities, apprehend the causal signs of those buddhafields and perfect many buddhafields even more expansive and more special than those, perfecting themselves in those buddhafields as bodhisattva great beings interrupted by a single birth.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections who, having become fully endowed with the thirty-two major marks of a great person, become endowed with refined and purified faculties. With their purified bodies they make beings feel a joy and serene confidence. They become dear to and loved by many people. Just that wholesome root of those beings  with that serene mental confidence furthermore causes them to gradually enter into complete nirvāṇa by means of the three vehicles.
 “Thus indeed, Śāriputra, should bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections train in the purified body; thus should they train in the purified speech and in the purified mind.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections who, having acquired refined faculties, do not, on account of their refined faculties, praise themselves and disparage others.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who, after producing the first thought of awakening, stand in the perfection of giving and the perfection of morality. Until they reach the irreversible stage they never become destitute and never tumble into terrible, catastrophic forms of life.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings who, after producing the first thought of awakening until they reach the irreversible stage, never quit the ten wholesome actions.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving and the perfection of morality who become wheel-turning emperors, establish beings in the ten wholesome actions, and gather beings together through giving and kind words.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving and the perfection of morality who, protecting many empires of wheel-turning emperors, dealing with many hundreds of thousands of empires of wheel-turning emperors, standing there pleasing many hundred thousand one hundred million billion buddhas, respect, revere, honor, and worship those lord buddhas  with all requirements and all offerings.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who lighten the darkness of beings standing in wrong views with the light of the buddhadharmas, and they never separate themselves from the light of the buddhadharmas up until they fully awaken to the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “This, Śāriputra, is the origination of the bodhisattva great beings in the buddhadharmas.
 “Therefore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom would provide no opportunity for basic immoral physical, verbal, and mental action.” 
 The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra then inquired of him, “What, Lord, is a bodhisattva great being’s basic immoral physical action, basic immoral verbal action, and basic immoral mental action?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, when it occurs to a bodhisattva great being, ‘This is the body with which I should undertake physical action, this the voice with which I should undertake verbal action, and this the thinking mind with which I should undertake mental action,’ Śāriputra, that undertaking of a physical, verbal, or mental action is a basic immorality of a bodhisattva great being. This is because, Śāriputra, a bodhisattva great being’s practice of the perfection of wisdom does not apprehend a body, does not apprehend a voice, and does not apprehend a thinking mind. 
 “Śāriputra, were bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom to apprehend a body, to apprehend a voice, and to apprehend a thinking mind, they would with that body, voice, and thinking mind cause a miserly thought to arise, or cause an immoral thought, a malicious thought, a lazy thought, a distracted thought, or a confused thought to arise. But something like that, Śāriputra, will never be known, because it is impossible for bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to cause the final physical, verbal, and thinking mind basis of suffering to arise. And why? Because, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections are causing the final physical basis of suffering to be cleansed, the final verbal basis of suffering to be cleansed, and the final thinking mind basis of suffering to be cleansed. And that, Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ absence of basic immoral physical, verbal, and mental action.”
 “How, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings cleanse basic immoral physical, verbal, and mental action?” asked Śāriputra.
 The Lord replied, “Śāriputra, because bodhisattva great beings do not apprehend a body, do not apprehend a voice, and do not apprehend a thinking mind, they thus cleanse basic immoral physical, verbal, and mental action. I say, Śāriputra, were bodhisattva great beings after producing the first thought of awakening to have taken and pursued the ten wholesome actions without producing a śrāvaka thought or a pratyekabuddha thought, were they to have constantly attended to a greatly compassionate thought for beings, in that case bodhisattva great beings  would have thoroughly cleansed the final physical basis of suffering, the final verbal basis of suffering, and the final mental basis of suffering.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom cleansing the awakening path who are practicing the perfection of giving and practicing the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom.” 
 “What, Lord, is the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening path?” asked Śāriputra.
 The Lord replied, “Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings practice the awakening path they do not apprehend a body, do not apprehend a voice, do not apprehend a thinking mind, do not apprehend the perfection of giving, do not apprehend the perfection of morality, do not apprehend the perfection of patience, do not apprehend the perfection of perseverance, do not apprehend the perfection of concentration, do not apprehend the perfection of wisdom, do not apprehend a Śrāvaka Vehicle, do not apprehend a Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, do not apprehend a Bodhisattva Vehicle, and do not apprehend a perfectly complete Buddha Vehicle. That is to say, this not apprehending all dharmas is the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening path because, Śāriputra, nobody is capable of breaking bodhisattva great beings traveling on this path practicing the six perfections.” 
 “How, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings who cannot be broken practice?” asked Śāriputra.
 The Lord replied, “Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings  practicing the six perfections do not falsely project form, and they do not falsely project feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; they do not falsely project the earth element, and they do not falsely project the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, or consciousness element; they do not falsely project eyes and form, and they do not falsely project ears and sound, nose and smell, tongue and taste, body and touch, or thinking mind and dharmas; they do not falsely project the eye constituent, form constituent, and eye consciousness constituent, and they do not falsely project the ear constituent, sound constituent, and ear consciousness constituent, the nose constituent, smell constituent, and nose consciousness constituent, the tongue constituent, taste constituent, and tongue consciousness constituent, the body constituent, touch constituent, and body consciousness constituent, or the thinking mind constituent, dharma constituent, and thinking-mind consciousness constituent. They do not falsely project the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path; they do not falsely project the perfection of giving, and they do not falsely project the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom; they do not falsely project the ten tathāgata powers, and they do not falsely project the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha;  they do not falsely project the result of stream enterer, and they do not falsely project the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one; and they do not falsely project a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, they do not falsely project a bodhisattva, and they do not falsely project unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings growing in the six perfections like that cannot be broken by anyone.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings standing in the six perfections who perfect the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. In possession of that knowledge they block all the gateways to terrible forms of life, do not become destitute, worn-out people, and do not appropriate the sort of body this world with its celestial beings criticizes.”
 Venerable Śāriputra then asked the Lord, “What, Lord, is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of a knower of all aspects?”
 The Lord replied, “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings in possession of that knowledge behold as many tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River residing in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. They listen to their Dharma, and they also see the bodhisattva saṅghas and behold the arrays of buddhafield qualities. Similarly, they behold as many tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River residing in world systems to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above,  as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. They listen to their Dharma, and they also see those bodhisattva saṅghas and behold the arrays of buddhafield qualities.
 “Bodhisattva great beings in possession of that knowledge form no notion of a buddha, form no notion of a bodhisattva, form no notion of a śrāvaka, form no notion of a pratyekabuddha, form no notion of a self, form no notion of an other, and form no notion of a buddhafield. Bodhisattva great beings in possession of that knowledge practice the perfection of giving and practice the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom but do not apprehend those six perfections. They cultivate the applications of mindfulness but do not apprehend the applications of mindfulness. They cultivate the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path but do not apprehend the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path. They do not apprehend the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or distinct attributes of a buddha. That, Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of a knower of all aspects, and bodhisattva great beings in possession of that knowledge perfect all the buddhadharmas but still do not see all the buddhadharmas. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who acquire the five eyes and cleanse them.  And what are the five? They are the flesh eye, divine eye, wisdom eye, dharma eye, and buddha eye.”
 “What, Lord, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure flesh eye?” asked Śāriputra.
 The Lord replied, “There is the flesh eye of a bodhisattva great being that sees for one hundred yojanas. There is the flesh eye of a bodhisattva great being that sees Jambudvīpa. There is the flesh eye of a bodhisattva great being that sees two continents. There is the flesh eye of a bodhisattva great being that sees a four-continent world system. There is the flesh eye of a bodhisattva great being that sees a thousand world systems. There is the flesh eye of a bodhisattva great being that sees a million world systems. And there is the flesh eye of a bodhisattva great being that sees the great billionfold world system. That, Śāriputra, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure flesh eye.”
 “What, Lord, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure divine eye?” asked Śāriputra.
 The Lord replied, “Śāriputra, bodhisattvas know the divine eye of the Cāturmahā­rājika gods. Bodhisattvas know the divine eye of the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods. Bodhisattvas know the divine eye of the Brahmapurohita, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, and Śubhakṛtsna; of the Anabhrakā, Puṇyaprasava, and Bṛhatphala; and  of the Asaṃjñisattva, Śuddhāvāsa, Avṛha, Atapa, Sudṛśa, Sudarśana, and Akaniṣṭha gods. Śāriputra, the Cāturmahā­rājika gods do not know the divine eye of bodhisattva great beings. Construe as before, up to the Akaniṣṭha gods do not know the divine eye of bodhisattvas.
 “With just that perfectly pure divine eye they know as they are the deaths and rebirths of beings established in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. Similarly, they know as they are the deaths and rebirths of beings established in as many world systems in each of the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. That, Śāriputra, is the perfectly pure divine eye of bodhisattva great beings.”
 “What, Lord, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure wisdom eye?” asked Śāriputra.
 The Lord replied, “There is no phenomenon that is compounded or uncompounded, wholesome or unwholesome, a basic immorality or not a basic immorality, with outflows or without outflows, with afflictions or without afflictions, ordinary or extraordinary, defiled or purified that bodhisattva great beings in possession of that wisdom eye do not know. There is no phenomenon at all that bodhisattva great beings in possession of that wisdom eye have not seen, or heard, or of which they have not been mindful, or of which they have not been aware. That, Śāriputra, is  the perfectly pure wisdom eye of a bodhisattva great being.”
 “What, Lord, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure dharma eye?” asked Śāriputra.
 The Lord replied, “Here a bodhisattva great being’s dharma eye knows, ‘This person is a faith follower, this one is a Dharma follower, this one dwells in emptiness, this one dwells in signlessness, this one dwells in wishlessness. Through the gateways to liberation the five faculties of this person will be produced, with the five faculties they will experience the uninterrupted meditative stabilization, with the uninterrupted meditative stabilization they will produce the knowledge and seeing of liberation, and with the knowledge and seeing of liberation they will eliminate the three fetters—the view of the perishable collection, doubt, and grasping rules and rituals as absolute. That person is called a stream enterer. This one, having reached the path of meditation, weakens attachment to sense objects and malice. That person is called a once-returner. And this one, by intense meditation on just that path eliminates attachment to sense objects and malice. That person is called a non-returner. This one, by intense meditation on just that path eliminates attachment to forms, attachment to formless states, ignorance, pride, and gross mental excitement. That person is called a worthy one.
 “ ‘This person dwells in emptiness. Through the emptiness gateway to liberation they will gain the five faculties, with the five faculties they will experience the uninterrupted meditative stabilization, with the uninterrupted meditative stabilization they will produce the knowledge and seeing of liberation, construing it as before, up to that person will reach the state of a worthy one. 
 “ ‘This person dwells in signlessness. Through the signless gateway to liberation they will gain the five faculties, construing it as before, up to that person will reach the state of a worthy one. 
 “ ‘This person dwells in wishlessness. Through the wishless gateway to liberation they will gain the five faculties. Then, with the five faculties they will experience the uninterrupted meditative stabilization; having reached the uninterrupted meditative stabilization they will produce the knowledge and seeing of liberation, up to they will reach the state of a worthy one.’ That, Śāriputra, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure dharma eye.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, that a bodhisattva, having thus realized that everything qualified by origination is qualified by cessation, will gain the five faculties, faith, and so on—that too, Śāriputra, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure dharma eye. 
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings know as follows: ‘This bodhisattva great being has produced the first thought of awakening, practices the perfection of giving, the perfection of morality, up to the perfection of wisdom, and gains the faculty of faith and the faculty of perseverance from that. Possessed of skillful means and stable with wholesome roots, they intentionally appropriate a body. This bodhisattva great being is born in great sāla tree–like royal families, this one in great sāla tree–like brahmin families, this one in great sāla tree–like business families, this one is born among the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, this one among the Trāyastriṃśa gods, this one the Yāma, this one the Tuṣita, this one the Nirmāṇarati, and this one the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods.  One, standing there, will bring beings to maturity, make available to those beings all their requirements for happiness, purify a buddhafield, please the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, and respect, revere, honor, and worship them. One will not fall to the śrāvaka level or to the pratyekabuddha level. This bodhisattva great being will be irreversible up until they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ That too, Śāriputra, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure dharma eye. 
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings know that these bodhisattva great beings have been prophesied to reach unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, these are definite, these are indefinite, these will be prophesied, these will not be prophesied, these are irreversible, these are not irreversible, the clairvoyances of these are complete, and the clairvoyances of these are not complete. These bodhisattva great beings with their completed clairvoyances go to as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, please the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, and respect, revere, honor, and worship them. Similarly, they go to as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast,  southwest, and northwest, below and above, please the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, and respect, revere, honor, and worship them. This one will acquire the clairvoyances, this one will not acquire the clairvoyances. This one has acquired the forbearance, this one has not acquired the forbearance. The buddhafield of this bodhisattva great being will become perfectly pure, the buddhafield of this one will not become perfectly pure. This bodhisattva great being has made the great prayer that is a vow, this one has not made the great prayer that is a vow. This one has brought beings to maturity, this one has not brought beings to maturity. The lord buddhas in the ten directions in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River speak in praise of this bodhisattva great being, but they do not speak in praise of this one. These bodhisattva great beings will stay close to the lord buddhas, these ones will not stay close. This bodhisattva’s lifespan will be finite, this one’s lifespan will be infinite. This one’s radiance, voice, and community of monks will be infinite, this one’s will be finite. This one will undertake the difficult practices, this one will not undertake them. This one is in a final existence, this one is not in a final existence. This one will be seated at the site of awakening,  this one will not be seated there. These bodhisattva great beings will have Māras, these will not have them.’ That too, Śāriputra, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure dharma eye.”
 “What, Lord, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure buddha eye?” asked Śāriputra.
 The Lord replied, “Bodhisattva great beings, right after the thought of awakening, become absorbed in the vajropama meditative stabilization and gain the knowledge of all aspects. They are endowed with the ten tathāgata powers, and they are endowed with the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, great compassion, and a buddha’s liberation without obscurations. This is their eye, endowed with which there is nothing bodhisattva great beings do not see, or hear, or remember, or know. That, Śāriputra, is a bodhisattva great being’s perfectly pure eye of a buddha who has fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Therefore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to cleanse and want to acquire the five eyes should make endeavors in the six perfections. And why? Because, Śāriputra, all wholesome dharmas, all śrāvaka dharmas, all pratyekabuddha dharmas, all bodhisattva dharmas, and all buddha dharmas are included in the six perfections. Śāriputra, if perfect teachers teach that all wholesome dharmas are inside the perfection of wisdom they are perfect teachers  teaching perfectly. And why? Because, Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom produces all the perfections and those five eyes, because bodhisattva great beings training in the five eyes will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Śāriputra, those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom will acquire the six clairvoyances and experience the performance of miraculous power in its various aspects. They will, furthermore, cause shaking. They will experience being one and becoming many, being many and becoming one, and appearing and disappearing. They will even go right through walls, even go right through fences, and even go right through mountains without them obstructing their bodies, just as they would through the sky. They will even travel cross-legged through the air like a bird on the wing. They will also emerge onto the earth and sink down into it, as they would do in water. They will also walk on water without sinking, as they would do on the earth. They will also emit smoke and flames, like a big bonfire. Even the sun and the moon, as incredibly magical, powerful, and grand as they are, they will touch and stroke with their hands. They extend their power up to the Brahmaloka with their bodies. 
 “Because its intrinsic nature is empty, its intrinsic nature is isolated, and its intrinsic nature is not produced, they do not apprehend a false projection of miraculous power, they do not apprehend what they might falsely project, or what might be falsely projecting; apart from paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects they do not intend miraculous power, or intend to accomplish miraculous power.  Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that accomplish knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes the performance of miraculous power. 
 “Because its intrinsic nature is empty, its intrinsic nature is isolated, and its intrinsic nature is not produced, they hear sounds with the purified divine ear that transcends the human—namely, human and divine ones. Thus they do not apprehend the sound, thinking, ‘I hear a sound with my divine hearing,’ so they do not falsely project it. Apart from paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects they do not intend that, or intend to accomplish that. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that accomplish knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes divine hearing.
 “With their mind they know the thought of other beings, of other persons, for what it is. They know a greedy thought for what it is: a greedy thought. They know a mind free from greed for what it is: a mind free from greed. Similarly, they know a mind with hate and free from hate, with confusion and free from confusion, with craving and free from craving, with appropriation and free from appropriation, collected and distracted, narrow and inclusive, absorbed and not absorbed, emancipated and not emancipated, with outflows and without outflows, blemished and unblemished, and they know a surpassed thought for what it is—a surpassed thought—and they know an unsurpassed thought for what it is: an unsurpassed thought. Because even that thought is no thought—because it is inconceivable—it  does not falsely project anything. They do not apprehend even that very thought that does not falsely project anything. Because its intrinsic nature is empty, its intrinsic nature is isolated, and its intrinsic nature is not produced, they do not falsely project ‘I know.’ Apart from paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects, they do not intend a thought. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that accomplish knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes the thought activity of all beings.
 “Śāriputra, they accomplish knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes knowledge that recollects past lives in various aspects: they recollect from one thought up to even a hundred thoughts, or they recollect one day up to a hundred days, one month up to a hundred months, one year up to a hundred years, one eon up to a hundred eons, or even up to many hundred eons, or up to many thousand eons, or up to many hundred thousand eons, or up to many hundred thousand one hundred million billion eons, recollecting right up to the very limit of the past. ‘I was in such-and-such a place, named so-and-so, in such-and-such a lineage, with such-and-such a birth status, following such-and-such a diet, pursuing such-and-such a livelihood, with an allotted lifespan of such-and-such a duration, actually living for such-and-such a length of time; having died there I was born in such-and-such places, and having died there then I took birth here.’ Thus, they recollect their own and others’ past lives in their various aspects along with the appearances, locations, and places of origin. Because even that knowledge is no knowledge—because it is inconceivable—that knowledge of clairvoyance that recollects past lives does not falsely project anything. They do not apprehend even that very knowledge  that does not falsely project anything. Because its intrinsic nature is empty, its intrinsic nature is isolated, and its intrinsic nature is not produced, they do not falsely project ‘I know.’ Apart from paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects, they do not intend to know recollection. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that accomplish knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes previous states of existence. 
 “With their purified divine eye that far surpasses the human they see beings, and they know beings that are dying and being born; are beautiful, ugly, vile, or exemplary; are in a good form of life and in a terrible form of life—exactly in accord with the action. They know those beings who have bad physical behavior, who have bad verbal behavior and bad mental behavior, who speak ill of noble beings, and who hold wrong views, and who with the action of those wrong views as a foundation and cause, on the breakup of their body after death tumble into and take birth in terrible, catastrophic forms of life. They know those beings who have good physical behavior, who have good verbal behavior and good mental behavior, who do not speak ill of noble beings, and who hold right views, and who with the action of that good physical, verbal, and mental behavior as a foundation and cause, take birth among the gods in good forms of life in the heavenly worlds. Thus, with their purified divine eye that far surpasses the human they know as they are the deaths and births of beings in the six forms of life in worlds in the ten directions as vast as the dharma-constituent and as far-reaching as the space element in all world systems. Because even that eye is no eye—because it is inconceivable—it does not falsely project anything. They do not apprehend even that very eye  that does not falsely project anything. Because its intrinsic nature is empty, its intrinsic nature is isolated, and its intrinsic nature is not produced, they do not falsely project ‘I know.’ Apart from paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects, they do not intend an eye. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that accomplish knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes the divine eye. 
 “They accomplish knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes the extinction of outflows and do not fall to the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level. They do not wish to attain any dharma apart from full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. With that clairvoyance, based on the vajropama meditative stabilization they eliminate all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions. Because even that knowledge is no knowledge—because it is inconceivable—the wholesomeness, when knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes the extinction of outflows has been accomplished, does not falsely project anything. They do not apprehend even that very knowledge. Because its intrinsic nature is empty, its intrinsic nature is isolated, and its intrinsic nature is not produced, they do not falsely project ‘I know.’ Apart from paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects, they do not intend even that knowledge. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that accomplish knowledge of the clairvoyance that realizes the extinction of outflows. 
 “Śāriputra, practicing the perfection of wisdom like that the six clairvoyances of bodhisattva great beings are perfected and purified, and those purified clairvoyances cause them to gain the knowledge of all aspects. 
Therefore, Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings  practicing the perfection of wisdom who, standing in the perfection of giving, cleanse the path to the knowledge of all aspects based on not holding on to anything because of the emptiness that transcends limits. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who, standing in the perfection of morality, cleanse the path to the knowledge of all aspects based on not incurring a downfall or a compounded downfall because of the emptiness that transcends limits.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who, standing in the perfection of patience, cleanse the path to the knowledge of all aspects based on there being no disturbance because of the emptiness that transcends limits. 
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who, standing in the perfection of perseverance, cleanse the path to the knowledge of all aspects based on being physically and mentally indefatigable because of the emptiness that transcends limits.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who, standing undistracted in the perfection of concentration, cleanse the path to the knowledge of all aspects because of the emptiness that transcends limits.
 “Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who, standing in the perfection of wisdom, cleanse the path to the knowledge of all aspects based on not apprehending intellectually confused thoughts because of the emptiness that transcends limits.
 “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that, standing in the six perfections, cleanse the path to the knowledge of all aspects based on not having gone, not having come, and not having grasped anything  because of the emptiness that transcends limits.
 “Śāriputra, giving is designated based on holding on to things; morality is designated based on immorality; patience is designated based on disturbance; perseverance is designated based on laziness; concentration is designated based on an uncollected state; and wisdom is designated based on intellectual confusion.
 “They do not falsely project ‘they have gotten beyond that.’ They do not falsely project ‘they have not gotten beyond that.’ They do not falsely project ‘giving and miserliness.’ They do not falsely project ‘morality and not morality.’ They do not falsely project ‘patience and disturbance.’ They do not falsely project ‘perseverance and laziness.’ They do not falsely project ‘a collected state and an uncollected state.’ They do not falsely project ‘wisdom and intellectual confusion.’ They do not falsely project ‘I have been snubbed.’ They do not falsely project ‘I have been saluted.’ They do not falsely project ‘I have been honored.’ They do not falsely project ‘I have not been honored.’ And why? Because, Śāriputra, a nonproduction does not falsely project ‘I have been snubbed.’ It does not falsely project ‘I have been saluted.’ It does not falsely project ‘I have been honored.’ It does not falsely project ‘I have not been honored.’ And why? Because the perfection of wisdom cuts off all false projection.
 “Here, Śāriputra, no śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas have these good qualities that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom have. Completing those qualities, they bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield,  and reach the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom produce the thought, in regard to all beings, that they are the same, and having produced the thought that all beings are the same, they attain the state in which all phenomena are the same; having attained the state in which all phenomena are the same, they establish all beings in the state in which all phenomena are the same. In this very life they become loved by and a pleasure to the lord buddhas; they also become loved by and a pleasure to all bodhisattvas, all śrāvakas, and all pratyekabuddhas. Wherever they are born they will never again see unpleasant shapes with their eyes, will not hear unpleasant sounds with their ears, will not smell unpleasant smells with their noses, will not taste unpleasant tastes with their tongues, will not feel unpleasant feelings with their bodies, and will not know unpleasant dharmas with their thinking minds. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are not lacking in what is necessary for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 While this exposition of the perfection of wisdom was being expounded three hundred monks dressed the body of the lord in whatever clothes they were wearing and produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 At that moment the Lord smiled. Venerable Ānanda then got up from his seat, adjusted his upper robe so it hung down from one shoulder, knelt down with his right knee on the ground, cupped his palms together in a gesture of supplication specifically to the Lord, bowed forward to him, and said to the Lord, “Lord, the tathāgatas, worthy ones,  perfectly complete buddhas do not give a smile without a cause, or without a condition. So why did you smile? What is the cause, and what is the condition?”
 The Lord said to venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, these three hundred monks, having died here, will be reborn in the buddhafield of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya. In sixty-one eons, during the Tārakopama eon, they will arise in the world as tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas named Mahāketu. And sixty thousand gods living in the desire realm have also produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and they will please the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Maitreya. Having gone forth to homelessness right there, they will practice celibacy, and the tathāgata Maitreya will prophesy their unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Then at that time, through the buddha’s might, the four retinues saw from there ten thousand buddhas seated in the eastern direction. They saw ten thousand buddhas seated in each of the ten directions up to the encircling mountain ranges. The array of the good qualities of the buddhafields of those lord buddhas that appears in those lord buddhas’ world systems is an array of good qualities of buddhafields that does not appear in this Sahā world system. As well, ten thousand of those who were in the retinue made this prayer that is a vow: “We will do the work that needs to be done so that we may take birth in those buddhafields.”
 Then the Buddha, aware of the aspiration of those children of good families, gave a smile.
 Venerable Ānanda then said to the Lord, “Lord, the lord buddhas  do not give a smile without a cause, or without a condition. So why did you smile? What is the cause, and what is the condition?”
 The Lord asked venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, do you see these ten thousand beings?”
 “I see them, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord said, “Ānanda these ten thousand beings, having died here, will take birth in those buddhafields and will never be separated from the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. Afterward they will become the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas named Vyuharāja.
This was the third chapter, “Designation,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 4: Equal to the Unequaled
Then venerable Śāriputra, venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, venerable Subhūti, venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra, and venerable Mahākāśyapa, as well as other monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen celebrated for the state of their clairvoyance, and very many bodhisattva great beings said to the Lord, “This, Lord—that is, the perfection of wisdom—is the great perfection of bodhisattva great beings. This perfection of wisdom, Lord, is the vast perfection of bodhisattva great beings. This perfection of wisdom, Lord, is the highest perfection of bodhisattva great beings. It is the special perfection, it is the best perfection, it is the superb perfection, it is the sublime  perfection, it is the unsurpassed perfection, it is the unrivaled perfection, it is the unequaled perfection, it is the perfection equal to the unequaled, it is the calm and gentle perfection, it is the matchless perfection, it is the perfection for which no example does justice, it is the space-like perfection, it is the perfection of the emptiness of particular defining marks, it is the perfection endowed with all good qualities. This, Lord—that is, the perfection of wisdom—is the uncrushable perfection of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing in this perfection of wisdom have bestowed a gift equal to the unequaled. They have fulfilled the perfection of giving equal to the unequaled. They have obtained a body equal to the unequaled. And they will obtain this, namely, the dharmas of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening equal to the unequaled.
 “Similarly with morality, patience, perseverance, and concentration, and they have developed wisdom equal to the unequaled. They have obtained a body equal to the unequaled. And they will obtain this, namely, the dharmas of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening equal to the unequaled. 
 “The Lord, too, practicing this very perfection of wisdom came to acquire a form equal to the unequaled; and he came to acquire feeling, perception, and volitional factors equal to the unequaled, and consciousness  equal to the unequaled. He fully awakened to an awakening equal to the unequaled. He turned the wheel of the Dharma equal to the unequaled. Similarly, past, future, and present buddhas, having practiced this very perfection of wisdom, have fully awakened, will fully awaken, and are awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Therefore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want to perfect all dharmas should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom. Lord, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras rightly bows down to any bodhisattva great being who has practiced in this perfection of wisdom.” 
 Those great śrāvakas having spoken thus, the Lord said to them, and to those very many bodhisattva great beings, “Exactly so, children of a good family, exactly so. It is just as you say. The world with its gods, humans, and asuras rightly bows down to any bodhisattva great being who practices this perfection of wisdom. Śāriputra, it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that the human realm appears in the world and that the realm of gods appears in the world. Similarly, that great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, great sāla tree–like business families, and wheel-turning emperors; the Cāturmahā­rājika gods; the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati,  Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmapurohita, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, Asaṃjñisattva, and Śuddhāvāsa—Avṛha, Sudarśana, Sudṛśa, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha—gods; and the gods in the Ākāśānantyāyatana, in the Vijñānānantyāyatana, in the Ākiṃcityāyatana, and in the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana appear in the world, and that stream enterers appear in the world, and that once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas appear in the world. Śāriputra, it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that the Three Jewels appear in this world, and that ordinary requirements for sustaining oneself—food, drink, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses, tools, gems, pearls, beryl, conch shells, crystals, corals, silver, and gold—appear in the world. Śāriputra, all the requirements for all the happiness of gods and humans, the happiness of existence, and the happiness of nirvāṇa, they all, Śāriputra, appear in the world thanks to bodhisattva great beings. And why? Because bodhisattvas practicing the bodhisattva practice, standing in the six perfections, personally give gifts and connect others with giving as well, personally protect morality and connect others with morality, personally develop patience and connect others  with patience, personally work hard at perseverance and connect others with perseverance, personally produce concentration and connect others with concentration, and personally develop wisdom and connect others with wisdom. Thereby, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings have set forth for the benefit and happiness of all beings.” 
This was the fourth chapter, “Equal to the Unequaled,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 5: Tongue
Then at that time the Lord extended his tongue and with it covered the great billionfold world system. Then from his tongue light beams of many colors, various colors, issued forth. Having issued forth, a great illumination spread through as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east. Similarly, a great illumination spread through as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above. 
 Then those infinite countless bodhisattva great beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east saw that array of light and asked the lord buddhas of each of their respective buddhafields, “Lord, through whose power has such a great illumination spread through these worlds like this?”
 Those lord buddhas said to those bodhisattva great beings, “In the western direction, O children of a good family, there is a world system called Sahā. There the tathāgata, the worthy one, the perfectly  complete buddha Śākyamuni has extended his tongue in order to demonstrate the perfection of wisdom to the bodhisattva great beings, causing this great illumination to pervade as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the ten directions.”
Connect this in the same way with as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the south, west, and north, below, and above, up to in all the ten directions in the same way. 
 The bodhisattva great beings then said to those lord buddhas, “Lord, we will also go to that Sahā world system to see, salute, and honor that tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Śākyamuni, to see those bodhisattva great beings who have gathered from the ten directions, and to listen to the perfection of wisdom.” 
 Those lord buddhas replied, “Go then, you children of a good family, if you feel that now is the right time.”
 Those bodhisattva great beings then bowed their heads to the feet of those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, circumambulated them seven times, and, carrying many parasols, flags, and banners, flowers, garlands, incense, creams, powders, and robes, and gold flowers and silver flowers, proceeded toward the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Śākyamuni with a great chorus produced by a marching band with instruments and drums from the ten directions.
 Then the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha gods, took  celestial flowers, garlands, incense, creams, and powders; celestial blue lotus, lotus, red lotus, white lotus, mandārava, big mandārava, and nāgavṛkṣa flowers; and tamāla leaves and approached the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Śākyamuni. Then those bodhisattva great beings and those gods strewed near, strewed in front, and strewed flowers all around the body of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Śākyamuni those flowers, garlands, incenses, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners.
 Those flowers and so on then rose up and stayed there suspended in the sky over the great billionfold world system—a second floor of flowers, square with four corners and four pillars, equidimensional, and perfectly proportioned, delightful and pleasing to the mind. 
 Then from that retinue hundreds of thousands of a hundred million billion beings rose from their seats, cupped their palms together in a gesture of supplication to the Lord, bowed forward to him, and said to the Lord, “Lord, in a future time may we too obtain just such attributes as the tathāgata, worthy one, perfect, complete Buddha has acquired; may we impart moral instructions to the śrāvaka community just as the Tathāgata teaches today; and may we teach the Dharma to just this sort of retinue.”
 Then the Lord, aware of the aspiration of those children of a good family, and aware of their forbearance for all dharmas that are not produced, do not occasion anything, and do not appear, smiled. 
 Venerable Ānanda then inquired of the Lord, “Lord, why did you smile? What is the cause, and what is the condition?”
 “Ānanda,” replied the Lord, “from this retinue a hundred thousand one hundred million billion beings have gained forbearance for dharmas that are not produced. In a future time in sixty four ten millions eons, during the Puṣpākara eon they will arise in the world as tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas called Bodhyaṅgapuṣpa.”
This was the fifth chapter, “Tongue,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 6: Subhūti
The Lord then said to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, starting with the perfection of wisdom, be confident in your readiness to give a Dharma discourse to the bodhisattva great beings about how bodhisattva great beings go forth in the perfection of wisdom.”
 Then it occurred to those bodhisattva great beings, those great śrāvakas, and those gods to think, “Will venerable Subhūti instruct the bodhisattva great beings in the perfection of wisdom on account of armor in which reposes the power of his own intellect and confident readiness, or will he instruct them through the power of the Buddha?”
 Then through the power of the Buddha venerable Subhūti, understanding in his mind the thought processes occurring to those bodhisattva great beings, those great śrāvakas, and those gods, said to venerable Śāriputra, “Venerable Śāriputra, whatever the Lord’s śrāvakas say, teach, and expound, it is all through the Tathāgata’s power.  And whatever the Tathāgata teaches, none of it contradicts the true nature of dharmas. When those children of a good family are training in that Dharma teaching they are also directly confronting the true nature of dharmas. Śāriputra, it is just the Tathāgata who, by skillful means, will expound the perfection of wisdom to the bodhisattva great beings. Śāriputra, teaching the perfection of wisdom here is not within the scope of any of the śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas or bodhisattva great beings.”
 Venerable Subhūti then said to the Lord, “Lord, you say this—namely, ‘bodhisattva great being.’ What phenomenon is this, the word bodhisattva great being, for? Lord, I do not see that—namely, the phenomenon with the name bodhisattva. Lord, I do not see those bodhisattva great beings, that perfection of wisdom, nor that word bodhisattva, so which bodhisattva great beings will I advise and instruct in what perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti,” the Lord replied, “those—namely, perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva, and the word bodhisattva—are just words. They do not exist inside, they do not exist outside, and they cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. Subhūti, it is like this: the word being is uttered again and again, but you cannot apprehend any being. It is a mere name designation, and except for being used conventionally as a mere word and conventional term, any phenomenon that is a designation is not produced and does not stop. Similarly with self, living being, creature, one who lives, individual, person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who makes someone else do, motivator, one who motivates, one who feels, one who makes someone else feel, one who knows, and one who sees—they are all phenomena that are designations, and thus, being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, phenomena that are designations are not produced and do not stop. Those names do not exist inside, they do not exist outside, and they cannot be apprehended where both do not exist.
 “Similarly, Subhūti, perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva, and the word bodhisattva are all phenomena that are designations, and that phenomenon that is a designation, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, is not produced and does not stop.
 “Subhūti it is like this: the form this inner body has is just a dharma designation, and that dharma designation, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, is not produced and does not stop. That name does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is just a dharma designation, and except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, is not produced and does not stop. That name does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. Similarly, Subhūti, perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva, and the word bodhisattva are all phenomena that are designations; that phenomenon that is a designation, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, is not produced and does not stop.
 “Subhūti, this—namely, eyes—is just a dharma designation, and, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, a dharma designation is not produced and does not stop. That name—eyes—does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. Similarly, Subhūti, ears . . . nose . . . tongue . . . body . . . and thinking mind is just a dharma designation, and that dharma designation, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, is not produced and does not stop. That name—thinking mind—does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Subhūti, a form is just a dharma designation, and, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, a dharma designation is not produced and does not stop. That name also does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. Similarly, Subhūti, a sound . . . a smell . . . a taste . . . a feeling . . . and a dharma is just a dharma designation, and that dharma designation, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, is not produced and does not stop. That name dharma does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Subhūti, eye constituent is just a dharma designation, and, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, a dharma designation is not produced and does not stop. That name eye constituent does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist.
 “Subhūti, form constituent is just a dharma designation, and, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, a dharma designation is not produced and does not stop. That name form constituent does not exist inside, does not exist outside,  and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist.
 “Subhūti, eye consciousness constituent is just a dharma designation, and, except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, a dharma designation is not produced and does not stop. That name eye consciousness constituent does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist.
 “Similarly, Subhūti, ear constituent . . . sound constituent . . . and ear consciousness constituent . . . ; nose constituent . . . smell constituent . . . and nose consciousness constituent . . . ; tongue constituent . . . taste constituent . . . and tongue consciousness constituent . . . ; body constituent . . . touch constituent . . . and body consciousness constituent . . . ; and thinking-mind constituent . . . dharma constituent . . . and thinking-mind consciousness constituent is just a dharma designation, and except for being used conventionally as just a name and a conventional term, a dharma designation is not produced and does not stop. That name thinking-mind consciousness constituent does not exist inside, it does not exist outside, and it cannot be apprehended where both do not exist.
 “Similarly, Subhūti, perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva, and the word bodhisattva are thus phenomena that are designations; those phenomena that are designations, except for being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, are not produced and do not stop. Those terms—perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva, and the word bodhisattva—do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: inner body is being used conventionally as a mere term. Skull, neck bone, shoulder blade, arm bone, spine, rib, hip bone, thigh bone, lower leg bone, and foot bone are conventions designated just by names. They are just dharma designations, and those dharma designations, except for being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, are not produced and do not stop. Those names do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva, and the word bodhisattva are phenomena that are designations, and those phenomena that are designations, except for being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, are not produced and do not stop. Those terms do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Subhūti, it is like outer grass,wood, branch, leaf, and petal. Those are all are just conventions designated by various words, and those words, except for being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, are not produced and do not stop. Those names do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva, and the word bodhisattva are phenomena that are designations, and those phenomena that are designations, except for being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, are not produced and do not stop. Those terms do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Subhūti, it is like the names of past lord buddhas—except for being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, they are not produced and do not stop. Those names do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and cannot be apprehended where both do not exist.
 “Subhūti, it is like a dream, an echo, an apparition, an illusion, a mirage, a reflection of the moon in water, and a tathāgata’s magical creation. All those phenomena are just merely designated and, except for being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, are not produced and do not stop. Those terms do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, all those phenomena—namely, perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva, and the word bodhisattva—are just merely designated, and those phenomena that are designations, except for being used conventionally as just names and conventional terms, are not produced and do not stop. Those terms do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and cannot be apprehended where both do not exist. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom should train in names that are conventional terms making things known, in advice that makes things known, and in dharmas that make things known.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom do not view ‘form is permanent.’ They do not view ‘form is impermanent.’ They do not view ‘form is happiness’ or ‘is suffering,’ ‘has a self’ or ‘is selfless,’ ‘is calm’ or ‘is not calm,’ ‘is empty’ or ‘is not empty,’ ‘has a sign,’ or ‘is signless,’ ‘is wished for’ or ‘is wishless,’ ‘is compounded’ or ‘is uncompounded,’ ‘is arising’ or ‘is stopping,’ ‘is isolated’ or ‘is not isolated,’ ‘is wholesome’ or ‘is unwholesome,’ ‘is with basic immorality’ or ‘is without basic immorality,’ ‘is with outflows’ or ‘is without outflows,’  ‘is afflicted’ or ‘is unafflicted,’ ‘is ordinary’ or ‘is extraordinary,’ ‘is defilement’ or ‘is purification,’ or ‘form is saṃsāra.’ Neither do they view ‘form is nirvāṇa.’ 
 “Similarly, they do not view ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’or ‘consciousness is permanent.’ They do not view ‘it is impermanent.’ Similarly they do not view it ‘is happiness’ or ‘is suffering,’ ‘has a self’ or ‘is selfless,’ ‘is calm’ or ‘is not calm,’ ‘is empty’ or ‘is not empty,’ ‘has a sign,’ or ‘is signless,’ ‘is a wish for’ or ‘is wishless,’ ‘is compounded’ or ‘is uncompounded,’ ‘is arising’ or ‘is stopping,’ ‘is isolated’ or ‘is not isolated,’ ‘is wholesome’ or ‘is unwholesome,’ ‘is with basic immorality’ or ‘is without basic immorality,’ ‘is with outflows’ or ‘is without outflows,’ ‘is afflicted’ or ‘is unafflicted,’ ‘is ordinary’ or ‘is extraordinary,’ ‘is defilement’ or ‘is purification,’ or ‘is saṃsāra’ or ‘is nirvāṇa.’ 
 “Similarly, they do not view ‘the eye constituent is permanent’ or ‘is impermanent,’ ‘the form constituent is permanent’ or ‘is impermanent,’ or ‘the eye consciousness constituent is permanent’ or ‘is impermanent,’ up to they do not view it ‘is saṃsāra’ or ‘is nirvāṇa.’
 “Similarly, they do not view ‘the ear constituent . . . ,’ the sound constituent . . . ,’ or ‘the ear consciousness constituent . . .’; ‘the nose constituent . . . ,’ ‘the smell constituent . . . ,’ or ‘the nose consciousness constituent . . .’; ‘the tongue constituent . . . ,’ ‘the taste constituent . . . ,’ or ‘the tongue consciousness constituent . . .’; ‘the body constituent . . . ,’  ‘the touch constituent . . . ,’ or ‘the body consciousness constituent . . .’; or the thinking-mind constituent . . . ,’ ‘the dharma constituent . . . ,’ or ‘the thinking-mind consciousness constituent is permanent’ or ‘is impermanent,’ up to they do not view it ‘is saṃsāra’ or ‘is nirvāṇa.’
 “They do not view that any ‘pleasurable feeling’ or ‘suffering feeling’ or ‘neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling’ that arises from the condition of contact between the eyes, form, and eye consciousness ‘is permanent’ or ‘is impermanent,’ up to they do not view that it ‘is saṃsāra’ or ‘is nirvāṇa.’ Similarly, they do not view that any ‘pleasurable feeling’ or ‘suffering feeling’ or ‘neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling’ that arises from the condition of contact between the ear constituent, sound constituent, and ear consciousness constituent; the nose constituent, smell constituent, and nose consciousness constituent; the tongue constituent, taste constituent, and tongue consciousness constituent; the body constituent, touch constituent, and body consciousness constituent; or the thinking-mind constituent, dharma-constituent, and thinking-mind consciousness constituent ‘is permanent’ or ‘is impermanent,’ up to they do not view that it ‘is saṃsāra’ or ‘is nirvāṇa.’
 “And why? Because bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not view the perfection of wisdom, a bodhisattva, or the word bodhisattva in the compounded element or uncompounded element. And why? Because, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not mentally construct and do not conceptualize any of those dharmas. Standing without mentally constructing any dharma, they cultivate the applications of mindfulness. Practicing the perfection of wisdom, they do not view  the perfection of wisdom or even the name perfection of wisdom; they do not view a bodhisattva or even the name bodhisattva. Similarly, when they cultivate the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path; the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; the powers and fearlessnesses, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha, and are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they do not, except for paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects, view the perfection of wisdom, the name perfection of wisdom, a bodhisattva, or the name bodhisattva. Those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom excellently realize the defining marks of the dharmas. And that defining mark of a dharma, of the dharmas, is not defiled and is not purified. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom should understand that they are just names and conventional terms that are dharma designations. Having understood that they are just names and conventional terms that are dharma designations, they do not settle down on form. They do not settle down on feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. They do not settle down on the eyes. They do not settle down on a form, eye consciousness, and eye contact. They do not settle down on any pleasurable feeling or suffering feeling or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact. 
 “Similarly, they do not settle down on the ears . . . , the nose . . . , the tongue . . . , or the body . . . , or on the thinking-mind, dharma, thinking-mind consciousness, and thinking-mind contact. They do not settle down on any pleasurable feeling or suffering feeling or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact. They do not settle down on the compounded element or the uncompounded element. They do not settle down on the perfection of giving. They do not settle down on the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom. They do not settle down on any of their names or marks.
 “They do not settle down on a bodhisattva’s body. They do not settle down on the flesh eye, divine eye, wisdom eye, dharma eye, or buddha eye. Similarly, they do not settle down on the perfection of clairvoyance, inner emptiness, outer emptiness, or inner and outer emptiness, up to they do not settle down on emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. They do not settle down on suchness. They do not settle down on the very limit of reality. They do not settle down on the dharma-constituent. They do not settle down on bringing beings to maturity, purifying a buddhafield, or skillful means. And why? Because something that might settle down, something on account of which it might settle down, and something on which it might settle down—none of those dharmas exist.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom who do not settle down on  all dharmas grow in the perfection of giving. They grow in the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom. They enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, step onto the irreversible level, complete the clairvoyances, and, having completed the clairvoyances, bring beings to maturity, and they respect, revere, honor, and worship the lord buddhas. They roam from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to purify a buddhafield and behold the lord buddhas. Having beheld those lord buddhas, the wholesome roots on account of which they would respect, revere, honor, and worship those lord buddhas will come about in them. And because of those wholesome roots they will come to be right in the presence of the lord buddhas. They will hear the Dharma from those lord buddhas, and the continuum of the Dharma they have heard will not be cut until reaching the site of awakening. They will obtain the dhāraṇī gateways. They will obtain the meditative stabilization gateways. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom should understand that it is a designation that is a name and conventional term for something. 
 “This ‘bodhisattva’—what do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva form, or is the bodhisattva other than form, or is the bodhisattva in form, or is form in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without form?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied. 
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness, or is the bodhisattva other than consciousness, or is the bodhisattva in consciousness, or is consciousness in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without consciousness?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva eyes, or is the bodhisattva other than eyes, or is the bodhisattva in eyes, or are eyes in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without eyes?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva ears . . . a nose . . . a tongue . . . a body . . . or a thinking mind, or is the bodhisattva other than a thinking mind, or is the bodhisattva in a thinking mind, or is a thinking mind in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without a thinking mind?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva a form, or is the bodhisattva other than a form, or is the bodhisattva in a form, or is a form in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without a form?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva a sound . . . a smell . . . a taste . . .  a feeling . . . or dharmas, or is the bodhisattva other than dharmas, or is the bodhisattva in dharmas, or are dharmas in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without dharmas?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva eyes, form, and eye consciousness; or is the bodhisattva other than eyes, form, and eye consciousness; or is the bodhisattva in eyes, form, and eye consciousness; or are eyes, form, and eye consciousness in the bodhisattva; or is the bodhisattva without eyes, form, and eye consciousness?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva ears, sound, and ear consciousness . . . nose, smell, and nose consciousness . . . tongue, taste, and tongue consciousness . . . body, touch, and body consciousness . . . or thinking mind, dharma, and thinking-mind consciousness? Or is the bodhisattva other than them, or is the bodhisattva in them, or are they in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without thinking mind, dharma, and thinking-mind consciousness?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva the earth element, or is the bodhisattva other than the earth element, or is the bodhisattva in the earth element, or is the earth element in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without the earth element?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied. 
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva the water element . . . the fire element . . . the wind element . . . the space element . . . or the consciousness element, or is the bodhisattva other than the consciousness element, or is the bodhisattva in the consciousness element, or is the consciousness element in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without the consciousness element?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva ignorance, or is the bodhisattva other than ignorance, or is the bodhisattva in ignorance, or is ignorance in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without ignorance?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva volitional factors . . . consciousness . . . name and form . . . the six sense fields . . . contact . . . feeling . . . craving . . . appropriation . . . existence . . . birth . . . or old age and death, or is the bodhisattva other than old age and death, or is the bodhisattva in old age and death, or is old age and death in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without old age and death?”
 “None of those, Lord,” he replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva the suchness of form, or is the bodhisattva other than the suchness of form, or is the bodhisattva in the suchness  of form, or is the suchness of form in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without the suchness of form?”
 “None of those, Lord,” Subhūti replied.
 The Lord then asked, “Similarly, is the bodhisattva the suchness of feeling . . . the suchness of perception . . . the suchness of volitional factors . . . or the suchness of consciousness, or is the bodhisattva other than the suchness of consciousness, or is the bodhisattva in the suchness of consciousness, or is the suchness of consciousness in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without the suchness of consciousness?”
 “None of those, Lord,” Subhūti replied.
 The Lord then asked, “Similarly, is the bodhisattva the suchness of the constituents, sense fields, or dependent origination, up to old age and death? Or is the bodhisattva other than the suchness of old age and death, or is the bodhisattva in the suchness of old age and death, or is the suchness of old age and death in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without the suchness of old age and death?”
 “None of those, Lord,” Subhūti replied.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, for what reason do you say, ‘The bodhisattva is not form, and the bodhisattva is not the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, or dependent origination, up to the suchness of old age and death?’ ”
 “Lord,” Subhūti replied, “when a being absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could that form be a bodhisattva? How could something other than form be a bodhisattva? How could a bodhisattva  be in form? How could form be in a bodhisattva? How could something without form be a bodhisattva? How could feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness be a bodhisattva? How could something other than consciousness be a bodhisattva? How could a bodhisattva be in consciousness? How could consciousness be in a bodhisattva? How could something without consciousness be a bodhisattva?”
Connect this in the same way with constituents, sense fields, and dependent origination.
 “Lord, when a being absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could old age and death be a bodhisattva? How could something other than old age and death be a bodhisattva? How could a bodhisattva be in old age and death? How could old age and death be in a bodhisattva? How could something without old age and death be a bodhisattva?
 “Lord, when a being absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could the suchness of form be apprehended in it?”
Connect this in the same way with the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, and dependent origination.
 “Lord, when a being absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could the suchness of old age and death be apprehended in it? It is impossible.”
 “Excellent, excellent, Subhūti!” said the Lord. “Bodhisattvas, Subhūti, should train in the perfection of wisdom like that, without apprehending a being.
 “And again, Subhūti, where you said, ‘Lord,  you say this, that is, “bodhisattva great being.” What phenomenon is this, the word bodhisattva great being, for?’ What do you think? Is bodhisattva the word for form? Or do you think bodhisattva is the word for feeling, perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness?”
 “None of those, Lord,” Subhūti replied.
 The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is bodhisattva the word for the permanence of form, or is bodhisattva the word for the impermanence of form? Similarly, is bodhisattva the word for the pleasurable state of form, the suffering state of form, the selfness of form, the selflessness of form, the calmness of form, or the noncalmness of form?
 “Similarly, is bodhisattva the word for the permanence of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness? Or for the impermanence of consciousness, the pleasurable state of consciousness, the suffering state of consciousness, the selfness of consciousness, the selflessness of consciousness, the calmness of consciousness, or the noncalmness of consciousness?
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is bodhisattva the word for the emptiness of form, the nonemptiness of form, the sign of a form, the signlessness of form, the form that is wished for, or the wishlessness of form? Is bodhisattva the word for the emptiness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness,  the nonemptiness of consciousness, the sign of consciousness, the signlessness of consciousness, the consciousness that is wished for, or the wishlessness of consciousness?”
 “None of those, Lord.” Subhūti replied. 
 The Lord said, “Subhūti, for what reason do you say that bodhisattva is not the word for the permanence of form and is not the word for the impermanence of form? Similarly, that bodhisattva is not the word for the pleasurable state or the suffering state of form, it is not the word for the self, it is not the word for selflessness, it is not the word for calmness, and it is not the word for noncalmness? That it is not the word for emptiness, it is not the word for nonemptiness, it is not the word for the state of having a sign, it is not the word for signlessness, it is not the word for the state of being a wish for, and it is not the word for wishlessness? Similarly, that bodhisattva is not the word for the permanence and is not the word for the impermanence of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness? And that neither is it the word for the pleasurable state, the suffering state, the self, selflessness, calmness, noncalmness, emptiness, nonemptiness, the state of having a sign, signlessness, the state of being a wish for, or wishlessness?”
 “Lord,” Subhūti replied, “when a form absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could bodhisattva be the word for form? Lord, when feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could bodhisattva be the word for consciousness? 
 “Lord, when permanence and impermanence absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could bodhisattva be the word for the permanence and the word for the impermanence of form?
 “Similarly, when the pleasurable state . . . the suffering state . . . self . . . selflessness . . . calmness . . . noncalmness . . . emptiness . . . nonemptiness . . . the state of having a sign . . . signlessness . . . the state of being a wish for . . . and wishlessness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could bodhisattva be the word for the wishlessness of form? 
 “Similarly, Lord, when permanence and impermanence absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could bodhisattva be the word for the permanence and for the impermanence of consciousness?
 “Similarly, when the pleasurable state . . . the suffering state . . . self . . . selflessness . . . calmness . . . noncalmness . . . emptiness . . . nonemptiness . . . the state of having a sign . . . signlessness . . . the state of being a wish for . . . and wishlessness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could bodhisattva be the word for the wishlessness of consciousness?”
 “Excellent, excellent, Subhūti!” said the Lord. “Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that should train in the perfection of wisdom without apprehending a word for form; without apprehending a word for feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; without apprehending the words for form as permanent, impermanent, a pleasurable state, a suffering state, self, selflessness, calmness, noncalmness, emptiness, nonemptiness, the state of having a sign, signlessness, the state of being a wish for, or wishlessness; and without apprehending the words for feeling,  perception, volitional factors, or consciousness as permanent, impermanent, a pleasurable state, a suffering state, selfness, selflessness, calmness, noncalmness, emptiness, nonemptiness, the state of having a sign, signlessness, the state of having a wish, or wishlessness.
 “Again, Subhūti, you say, ‘I do not see that—namely, the phenomenon with the name bodhisattva.’ The dharma does not see the dharma-constituent; the dharma-constituent does not see the dharma. Subhūti, the form constituent does not see the dharma-constituent, and the dharma-constituent does not see the form constituent. Similarly, Subhūti, the feeling constituent . . . the perception constituent . . . the volitional factors constituent . . . and the consciousness constituent do not see the dharma-constituent, and the dharma-constituent does not see the consciousness constituent. The eye constituent does not see the dharma-constituent. Similarly, the ear constituent . . . the nose constituent . . . the tongue constituent . . . the body constituent . . . and the thinking-mind constituent does not see the dharma constituent, and the dharma-constituent does not see the thinking-mind constituent. Subhūti, the compounded element does not see the uncompounded element, and the uncompounded element does not see the compounded element. And why? You cannot make the uncompounded known without the compounded, and you cannot make the compounded known without the uncompounded. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  like that do not see any dharma at all, but they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified at not seeing; their minds are not cowed by any dharma, do not tense up, and do not experience regret.
 “And why? Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see form; do not see feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; do not see eyes; do not see ears, nose, tongue, body, or thinking mind; do not see a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, or a dharma; do not see ignorance; do not see volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, or old age and death; do not see greed; do not see hatred or confusion; do not see a self; do not see a being, a living being, one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who feels, one who knows, or one who sees; do not see the desire realm; do not see the form realm or formless realm; do not see śrāvakas and the śrāvaka dharmas; do not see pratyekabuddhas and the pratyekabuddha dharmas; do not see bodhisattvas and do not see bodhisattva dharmas; do not see buddhas  and do not see buddha dharmas; do not see awakening, up to do not see all dharmas. And while not seeing all dharmas they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified.”
 “Lord, why do the minds of a bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom not become cowed by all dharmas and not tense up?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “It is because, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not apprehend and do not view mind and mental factor dharmas. Therefore, Subhūti, the minds of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not become cowed by all dharmas and do not tense up.”
 “Lord, how is it that the thinking minds of bodhisattva great beings do not tremble?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Because, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not apprehend and do not view mind and mental factor dharmas or thinking mind and thinking-mind dharmas. Therefore the thinking minds of bodhisattva great beings do not tremble at all dharmas. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of wisdom like that, without apprehending all dharmas. Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend a perfection of wisdom, that bodhisattva, that word for bodhisattva, or even that bodhicitta, then just that is the advice about the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattvas; just that is the instruction.” 
This was the sixth chapter, “Subhūti,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 7: Entry into Flawlessness
Venerable Subhūti then said to the Lord, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend form should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend eyes should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend a form should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend eye consciousness should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend up to thinking-mind consciousness should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend eye contact up to who want to comprehend thinking-mind contact should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend the feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact, up to who want to comprehend the feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend ignorance should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, and old age and death should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings who want to eliminate greed, hatred, and confusion should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to eliminate the view of the perishable collection, doubt, and grasping rules and rituals as absolute, as well as attachment to sense objects and malice; who want to eliminate attachment to sense objects, attachment to forms, and attachment to formless states; and who want to eliminate fetters, proclivities, and obsessions should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, bodhisattva great beings who want to eliminate the four bonds, four floods, four knots, four appropriations, and four errors should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Bodhisattva great beings who want to eliminate the ten unwholesome actions should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings who want to complete the ten wholesome actions should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Bodhisattva great beings who want to complete the  perfection of giving should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to complete the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Bodhisattva great beings who want to complete the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and the eightfold noble path, as well as the four detailed and thorough knowledges, four fearlessnesses, six clairvoyances, ten tathāgata powers, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Bodhisattva great beings who want to become absorbed in the bodhyaṅgavatin meditative stabilization should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to become absorbed in the siṃhavikrīḍita meditative stabilization, who want to become absorbed in the siṃha­vijṛmbhita meditative stabilization, who want to obtain all the dhāraṇī gateways and meditative stabilization gateways, who want to become absorbed in the śūraṅgama meditative stabilization, and who want to become absorbed in the ratnamudra meditative stabilization, candraprabha meditative stabilization, candra­dhvaja­ketu meditative stabilization, sarva­dharma­mudrāgata meditative stabilization, avalokita meditative stabilization, dharma­dhātu­niyata meditative stabilization, niyata­dhvaja­ketu meditative stabilization, vajropama meditative stabilization, sarva­dharma­praveśa­mukha meditative stabilization, samādhirāja meditative stabilization, rājamudra meditative stabilization, balavyūha meditative stabilization, samudgata meditative stabilization, sarva­dharma­nirukti­niyata­praveśa meditative stabilization, sarva­dharma­jñānādhivāsana­praveśa meditative stabilization, daśa­digvyavalokita meditative stabilization, sarva­dharma­dhāraṇī­mukha­mudra meditative stabilization, sarva­dharmāsaṃpramoṣa meditative stabilization, sarva­dharma­samavasaraṇākāra­mudra meditative stabilization, tri­maṇḍala­pariśuddha meditative stabilization, ākāśāvasthita meditative stabilization, acyutābhijñā meditative stabilization, pātragata meditative stabilization, dhvajāgra­keyūra meditative stabilization, sarva­kleśa­nirdahana meditative stabilization, caturmāra­bala­vikaraṇa meditative stabilization, jñānolka meditative stabilization, daśabalodgata meditative stabilization, and ākāśāsaṃga­vimukti­nirupalepa meditative stabilization should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to obtain all those meditative stabilization gateways and others as well should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want to fulfill all the intentions of beings should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want to complete all the wholesome roots which, when those wholesome roots are completed, cause them not to fall into terrible forms of life, not to be born  in families that are wanting, not to fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, and not to fall into a bodhisattva’s hardheadedness should train in the perfection of wisdom.” 
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Subhūti, “How, Venerable Subhūti, do they fall into a bodhisattva’s hardheadedness?”
 Venerable Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practice the six perfections without skillful means. Having resorted to the meditative stabilization on emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness without skillful means, they do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, but still they do not enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva. This is called ‘a bodhisattva’s hardheadedness.’ ”
 “Why, Venerable Subhūti, is this a bodhisattva’s hardheadedness?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, a bodhisattva great being’s ‘hardheadedness’ is just this: a love for dharmas.” 
 “What, Venerable Subhūti, is a love for dharmas?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom settle down on, stand upon, and form the notion that form is ‘empty.’ Similarly, they settle down on, stand upon, and form the notion that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘empty.’ That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the love for dharmas called hardheadedness that can come along with being a bodhisattva great being.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattvas bodhisattvas settle down on, stand upon, and form the notion that form is ‘impermanent,’ and they also settle down on, stand upon,  and form the notion that to the notion that  form is ‘suffering, selfless, unpleasant, and calm, empty, signless, and wishless.’  Venerable Śāriputra, that love for dharmas that can come along with being a bodhisattva is hardheadedness.
 “Similarly, they settle down on, stand upon, and form the notion that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘impermanent,’ and they also settle down on, stand upon, and form the notion that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘suffering, selfless, unpleasant, and calm, empty, signless, and wishless.’ Venerable Śāriputra, that love for dharmas that can come along with being a bodhisattva is hardheadedness. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom might settle down on, stand upon, and form the notion about these dharmas: ‘Thus form should be abandoned; with this, form should be abandoned. Thus feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness should be abandoned; with this, they should be abandoned. Thus should suffering be comprehended; with this should suffering be comprehended. Thus should origination be abandoned; with this should origination be abandoned. Thus should cessation be actualized; with this should cessation be actualized. Thus should the path be cultivated; with this should the path be cultivated. This is defilement, this is purification; these dharmas are to be resorted to, these dharmas are not to be resorted to; this should be practiced by a bodhisattva, this should not be practiced; this is a bodhisattva’s path, this is not the path; this is a bodhisattva’s training, this is not the training; this is a bodhisattva’s perfection of giving, and this is the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom;  this is not a bodhisattva’s perfection of giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom; this is a bodhisattva’s skillful means, this is not skillful means; and this is the secure state of a bodhisattva, this is hardheadedness.’ If so, then that love for dharmas that can come along with being a bodhisattva is hardheadedness.”
 “What, Venerable Subhūti, is a bodhisattva great being’s flawlessness?” asked venerable Śāriputra.
 Venerable Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see in inner emptiness outer emptiness, and do not see in outer emptiness inner emptiness; do not see in inner and outer emptiness the emptiness of emptiness, and do not see in the emptiness of emptiness inner and outer emptiness; do not see in the emptiness of emptiness the great emptiness, and do not see in the great emptiness the emptiness of emptiness; do not see in the great emptiness the emptiness of ultimate reality, and do not see in the emptiness of ultimate reality the great emptiness; do not see in the emptiness of ultimate reality the emptiness of the compounded, and do not see in the emptiness of the compounded the emptiness of ultimate reality; do not see in the emptiness of the compounded the emptiness of the uncompounded, and do not see in the emptiness of the uncompounded the emptiness of the compounded; do not see in the emptiness of the uncompounded the emptiness of what transcends limits, and do not see in the emptiness of what transcends limits the emptiness of the uncompounded; do not see in the emptiness of what transcends limits the emptiness of no beginning and no end, and do not see in the emptiness of no beginning and no end the emptiness of what transcends limits; do not see in the emptiness of no beginning and no end the emptiness of nonrepudiation, and do not see in the emptiness of nonrepudiation the emptiness of no beginning and no end; do not see in the emptiness of nonrepudiation the emptiness of a basic nature, and do not see in the emptiness of a basic nature the emptiness of nonrepudiation;  do not see in the emptiness of a basic nature the emptiness of its own mark, and do not see in the emptiness of its own mark the emptiness of a basic nature; do not see in the emptiness of its own mark the emptiness of all dharmas, and do not see in the emptiness of all dharmas the emptiness of its own mark; do not see in the emptiness of all dharmas the emptiness of a nonexistent thing, and do not see in the emptiness of a nonexistent thing the emptiness of all dharmas; do not see in the emptiness of a nonexistent thing the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, and do not see in the emptiness of an intrinsic nature the emptiness of a nonexistent thing; do not see in the emptiness of an intrinsic nature the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and do not see in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature the emptiness of an intrinsic nature. Venerable Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom like that they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom train so that they know form but do not falsely project anything because of it; they know feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness but do not falsely project anything because of them; they know the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind but do not falsely project anything because of them; they know a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma but do not falsely project anything because of them; they know the perfection of giving but do not falsely project anything because of it; they know the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance,  concentration, and wisdom but do not falsely project anything because of them; they know the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions but do not falsely project anything because of them; and similarly they know the five clairvoyances, five eyes, applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, path, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha but do not falsely project anything because of them.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom train so that they do not falsely project anything even because of the thought of awakening; they do not falsely project anything even because of the thought equal to the unequaled, the prodigious thought. And why? Because that thought is no thought because the basic nature of thought is clear light.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, what is the clear light that is the basic nature of thought?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, a thought that is neither conjoined with greed nor disjoined from greed, neither conjoined with hatred and confusion nor disjoined from hatred and confusion, and neither conjoined with obsessions, obscurations, proclivities, fetters, distortions, and śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha thoughts nor disjoined from them—that, venerable Śāriputra, is the clear light that is the basic nature of a bodhisattva great being’s thought.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, the thought of which you say ‘it is no thought,’ does it exist?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” Subhūti asked in return, “can you apprehend existence or nonexistence there, in that state of no thought? 
 “No, Venerable Subhūti,” replied Śāriputra.
 Subhūti then asked, “Venerable Śāriputra, if you cannot apprehend existence or nonexistence there, in that state of no thought, is then, Venerable Śāriputra, this argumentative investigation of yours—‘The thought of which you say “it is no thought,” does it exist?’—appropriate?”
 “Venerable Subhūti,” Śāriputra asked in return, “what is the state of no thought?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “the state of no thought is a state without distortion and without conceptualization; it is the state in which all dharmas are just so. It is called the state of no thought’s ‘unthinkability.’ ” 
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, just as thought is without distortion and without conceptualization, so too is form without distortion and without conceptualization, and similarly feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are without distortion and without conceptualization as well; and just as thought is without distortion and without conceptualization so too are the eye constituent, form constituent, and eye consciousness constituent without distortion and without conceptualization, and similarly the ear constituent . . . the nose constituent . . . the tongue constituent . . . the body constituent . . . and the thinking-mind constituent, dharma-constituent, and thinking-mind consciousness constituent without distortion and without conceptualization as well—similarly, are the sense fields, dependent originations, perfections, clairvoyances, applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, path, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, powers, distinct attributes of a buddha, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening without distortion and without conceptualization as well?”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra!” replied Subhūti.  “Just as thought is without distortion and without conceptualization, so too are the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, dependent origination, perfections, clairvoyances, dharmas on the side of awakening, powers, fearlessnesses, distinct attributes of a buddha, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening without distortion and without conceptualization as well.”
 “Excellent, excellent, Venerable Subhūti!” said Śāriputra. “Because you are the Lord’s son, close to his bosom, born from his mouth, born from his Dharma, magically produced from his Dharma, his Dharma heir and not heir to material possessions, a direct eyewitness to the dharmas who witnesses with your body—that is, because the Lord has proclaimed you the foremost of śrāvakas who are at the conflict-free stage, this is an exhibition of that fact. 
 “Venerable Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of wisdom like that, and because of that bodhisattva great beings must be considered irreversible, and should be known as not lacking in the perfection of wisdom. Venerable Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to train in the śrāvaka level should concentrate and listen to, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, study, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom; and bodhisattva great beings who want to train in the pratyekabuddha level, the bodhisattva level, and the buddha level should also concentrate and listen to, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom. And why?  Because in this perfection of wisdom is detailed instruction for the three vehicles in which bodhisattva great beings should train on the level of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas.”
This was the seventh chapter, “Entry into Flawlessness,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 8: The Religious Mendicant Śreṇika
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, given that I do not find, do not apprehend, and do not see a bodhisattva or the perfection of wisdom, to which bodhisattva will I give advice and instruction in what perfection of wisdom? Lord, given that I do not find, do not apprehend, and do not see any real basis, this really is something I might be uneasy about—Lord, while not finding, not apprehending, and not seeing any real basis, which dharma will advise and instruct which dharma? Because, Lord, given that I do not find, do not apprehend, and do not see all dharmas, this really is something I might be uneasy about, how I might make just the name bodhisattva and just the name perfection of wisdom wax and wane. 
 “Lord, furthermore, that name does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. And why? It is because that name does not exist that it does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. Lord, given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of form, and, Lord, given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness either, what will I label  with the name bodhisattva? By the same token, Lord, that name does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. And why? That name does not exist, therefore it does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. 
 “Lord, given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the eyes, and, Lord, given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the ears, nose, tongue, body, or thinking mind, and similarly, given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the constituents, sense fields, or dependent origination, how will I label anything with the name bodhisattva? 
 “The name form, and the names feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, as well as ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind, do not stand alone and do not meet up with anything. And why? Those names do not exist, therefore they do not stand alone and do not meet up with anything. 
 “Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of eye consciousness. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, or thinking-mind consciousness, so how will I, while not apprehending and not seeing eye consciousness, or ear, nose, tongue, body, or thinking-mind consciousness, label anything with the name bodhisattva? Lord, also those names do not stand alone and do not meet up with anything. And why? Those names do not exist, therefore they do not stand alone and do not meet up with anything.
 “Lord, I  do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of eye contact, of ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact, or of feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of feeling that arises from the condition of ear, nose, tongue, and body, or thinking-mind contact. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the earth element, and I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, or consciousness element. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of ignorance, and, Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, or old age and death. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of greed, hatred, or confusion. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of obsessions, obscurations, proclivities, or fetters. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the sixty-two views. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of self, and, Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of a living being, a creature, one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does,  one who feels, one who knows, or one who sees. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the perfection of giving, and, Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of any of the emptinesses. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the applications of mindfulness, Lord, and similarly I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the four right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the gateways to liberation—emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the four concentrations, four immeasurables, or four formless absorptions. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of morality, mindfulness of giving away, mindfulness of the gods, mindfulness of what is included in the body, mindfulness of disgust, mindfulness of breathing in and out, or mindfulness of death. 
 “And, Lord, given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the five eyes, six clairvoyances, ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges,  or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, what will I label with the name bodhisattva? That name, furthermore, does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. And why? That name does not exist, therefore it does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. 
 “Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the five appropriating aggregates, which are like a dream, and, Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the five appropriating aggregates, which are like an illusion, a mirage, a city of the gandharvas, an echo, an apparition, a reflection in the mirror, and a magical creation. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of isolation, calm, nonproduction, nonstopping, nonappearing, not occasioning anything, nondefilement, or nonpurification. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, or the inconceivable element.
 “Similarly, Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the dharmas that are wholesome and unwholesome, basic immorality and not basic immorality, with outflows and without outflows, with afflictions and without afflictions, ordinary and extraordinary, compounded and uncompounded, defiled and purified,  or saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of dharmas that are past, future, or present. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the Lord. Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of tathāgatas, worthy ones, unsurpassed, perfect, complete buddhas seated together with their śrāvaka saṅghas and bodhisattva communities in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. Lord, given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of tathāgatas, worthy ones, unsurpassed, perfect, complete buddhas seated together with their śrāvaka saṅghas and bodhisattva communities in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, or northwestern directions, below or above, which bodhisattva will I advise and instruct in what perfection of wisdom? Lord, that name, furthermore, does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. And why? That name does not exist, therefore it does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. 
 “Thus, Lord, I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of the suchness of all phenomena. Given that I do not apprehend and do not see even the waxing and waning of the name of the suchness of all phenomena, which bodhisattva will I advise and instruct in what perfection of wisdom? Lord, that name suchness, furthermore, does not stand alone  and does not meet up with anything. And why? That name does not exist, therefore it does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. 
“Lord, whatever this designation bodhisattva that is a conventional term for the true nature of dharmas is, it cannot be said to be aggregates, or constituents, or sense fields, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha—or anything at all, insofar as it is just a dharma designation. Lord, it is just as the name dream cannot be said to be anything at all, and the names illusion, echo, apparition, mirage, a reflection of the moon in water, and magical creation cannot be said to be anything at all. That which is the name space cannot be said to be anything at all, and similarly the names earth, water, fire, and wind cannot be said to be anything at all. That which is the name suchness cannot be said to be anything at all, and the names unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, true nature of dharmas, dharma-constituent, establishment of dharmas, certification of dharmas, and very limit of reality cannot be said to be anything at all; the names perfection of giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and perfection of wisdom cannot be said to be anything at all; and the names morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation cannot be said to be anything at all. That which is the name stream enterer cannot be said to be anything at all, and the name stream enterer dharmas and the names once-returner, non-returner, worthy one, pratyekabuddha, bodhisattva, and bodhisattva dharmas cannot be said to be anything at all. That which is the name buddha and the name buddha dharmas cannot be said to be anything at all—to be wholesome or unwholesome or neutral, to be basic immorality or not basic immorality, to be permanent or impermanent, or to be happiness or suffering, self or no self, calm or not calm, isolated or not isolated, or a real thing or not a real thing. Having seen the reason for this, Lord, I said, ‘Given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of all dharmas, this really is something I might be uneasy about, namely, were I to label with the name bodhisattva or perfection of wisdom.’ Lord, that name, furthermore, does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. And why? That name does not exist, therefore it does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. 
 “Lord, if the minds of bodhisattva great beings are not cowed, do not tense up, and do not experience regret, and if they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when the perfection of wisdom is being spoken about, you should know that those bodhisattva great beings stand on the irreversible level by way of not taking their stand on it and will go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in form; they should not stand in feeling, perception, volitional factors,  or consciousness; they should not stand in the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, or thinking mind; and they should not stand in a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, or a dharma. They should not stand in the eye consciousness, and they should not stand in the ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, or thinking-mind consciousness. They should not stand in eye contact; they should not stand in feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact; they should not stand in ear, nose, tongue, body, or thinking-mind contact; and they should not stand in feeling that arises from the condition of ear, nose, tongue, body, or thinking-mind contact. They should not stand in the earth element, and they should not stand in the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, or consciousness element. They should not stand in ignorance, and they should not stand in volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, or old age and death. 
 “And why? Lord, it is because form is empty of form, and because feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of consciousness. Lord, that emptiness of form is not form, and emptiness is not other than form. Form itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is form. Lord, that emptiness of feeling is not feeling, and emptiness is not other than feeling. Feeling itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is feeling. Lord, that emptiness of perception is not perception, and emptiness is not other  than perception. Perception itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is perception. Lord, that emptiness of volitional factors is not volitional factors, and emptiness is not other than volitional factors. Volitional factors themselves are emptiness, and emptiness itself is volitional factors. Lord, that emptiness of consciousness is not consciousness, and emptiness is not other than consciousness. Consciousness itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is consciousness. 
 “Because of this one of many explanations, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in form, and they should not stand in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Connect this in the same way with the constituents and sense fields.
 “The earth element is empty of the earth element. The emptiness of the earth element is not the earth element, and emptiness is not other than the earth element. The earth element itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is the earth element. The water element . . . the fire element . . . the wind element . . . the space element . . . and the consciousness element is empty of the consciousness element. The emptiness of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element, and emptiness is not other than the consciousness element. The consciousness element itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is the consciousness element.
 “Ignorance is empty of ignorance. The emptiness of ignorance is not ignorance, and emptiness is not other than ignorance. Ignorance itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is ignorance. Volitional factors . . . consciousness . . .  name and form . . . the six sense fields . . . contact . . . feeling . . . craving . . . appropriation . . . existence . . . birth . . . and old age and death is empty of old age and death. The emptiness of old age and death is not old age and death, and emptiness is not other than old age and death. Old age and death themselves are emptiness, and emptiness itself is old age and death. Because of this one of many explanations, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in ignorance, up to old age and death. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in the applications of mindfulness. And why? Because the applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness. That emptiness of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness, and emptiness is not other than the applications of mindfulness. The applications of mindfulness themselves are emptiness, and emptiness itself is the applications of mindfulness. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in the applications of mindfulness. 
 “Similarly, they should not stand in the right efforts . . . legs of miraculous power . . . faculties . . . powers . . . limbs of awakening . . . path . . . noble truths . . . concentrations . . . immeasurables . . . formless absorptions . . . eight deliverances . . . nine serial absorptions . . . emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness . . . clairvoyances . . . ten powers . . . fearlessnesses . . . detailed and thorough knowledges . . . great love . . . great  compassion . . . or the distinct attributes of a buddha.
 “And why? Because the distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of the distinct attributes of a buddha. That emptiness of the distinct attributes of a buddha is not the distinct attributes of a buddha, and emptiness is not other than the distinct attributes of a buddha. The distinct attributes of a buddha themselves are emptiness, and emptiness itself is the distinct attributes of a buddha. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in the distinct attributes of a buddha.
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in the perfection of giving. And why? Because the perfection of giving is empty of the perfection of giving. Lord, that emptiness of the perfection of giving is not the perfection of giving, and emptiness is not other than the perfection of giving. The perfection of giving itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is the perfection of giving. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . or the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because the perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom. Lord, that emptiness of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom, and emptiness is not other than the perfection of wisdom. The perfection of wisdom itself is emptiness, and  emptiness itself is the perfection of wisdom. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in syllables, in syllable accomplishment, in a single explanation, in two explanations, or in a number of different explanations. And why? Lord, it is because syllables are empty of syllables. Lord, that emptiness of syllables is not syllables, and emptiness is not other than syllables. The syllables themselves are emptiness, and emptiness itself is the syllables. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in syllables.
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in ‘form is impermanent,’ and they should not stand in ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is impermanent.’ And why? Lord, it is because form that is impermanent is empty of the intrinsic nature of form that is impermanent. That which is the emptiness of impermanence is not impermanence, and impermanence is not other than emptiness. Impermanence itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is impermanence. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in ‘form is impermanent.’
 “Similarly, they should not stand in ‘feeling is impermanent’ . . . ‘perception is impermanent’ . . .  ‘volitional factors are impermanent’ . . . or ‘consciousness is impermanent.’ And why? Lord, it is because consciousness that is impermanent is empty of the intrinsic nature of consciousness that is impermanent. That which is the emptiness of impermanence is not impermanence, and impermanence is not other than emptiness. Impermanence itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is impermanence. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in consciousness. 
 “Similarly, they should not stand in ‘form is suffering, selfless, calm, empty, signless, wishless, or isolated.’ Similarly, they should not stand in ‘feeling . . .’; ‘perception . . .’; ‘volitional factors . . .’; or consciousness is suffering, selfless, calm, empty, signless, wishless, or isolated.’ And why? Lord, it is because consciousness that is isolated is empty of consciousness that is isolated. Lord, the isolation of consciousness is not consciousness, and isolation is not other than consciousness. Consciousness itself is isolation, and isolation itself is consciousness. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in ‘consciousness is isolated.’
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in suchness. And why? Lord, it is because suchness is empty of suchness. Lord, the emptiness of suchness is not suchness,  and suchness is not other than emptiness. Suchness itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is suchness. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in suchness. Similarly, they should not stand in the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the certification of dharmas, or the very limit of reality.
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in all the dhāraṇī gateways. And why? Lord, it is because the dhāraṇī gateways are empty of the dhāraṇī gateways. Lord, the emptiness of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways, and the dhāraṇī gateways are not other than emptiness. The dhāraṇī gateways themselves are emptiness, and emptiness itself is the dhāraṇī gateways. Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in all the dhāraṇī gateways.
 “Furthermore, Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom without skill in means stand in form with a mind that has descended into grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine,’ they practice an enactment of form, and they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. If they stand in feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness, they practice an enactment of consciousness, and they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because bodhisattva great beings practicing an enactment do not cultivate the perfection of wisdom, do not fully grasp the perfection of wisdom, do not  become absorbed in the yoga of the perfection of wisdom, and therefore do not fulfill the perfection of wisdom and go forth to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom without skill in means stand in the dhāraṇī gateways with minds that have descended into grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine,’ they practice an enactment of them, and they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because bodhisattva great beings practicing an enactment do not cultivate the perfection of wisdom, do not fully grasp the perfection of wisdom, do not become absorbed in the yoga of the perfection of wisdom, and therefore do not fulfill the perfection of wisdom and go forth to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom without skill in means stand in suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, or the very limit of reality with minds that have descended into grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine,’ they practice an enactment of those, and they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because bodhisattva great beings practicing an enactment do not cultivate the perfection of wisdom, do not fully grasp the perfection of wisdom, do not become absorbed in the yoga of the perfection of wisdom, and therefore do not complete the perfection of wisdom and go forth to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “And why? It is because, Lord, form is not fully grasped, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not fully grasped. And why? Because a form not fully grasped is not form because of the emptiness of a basic nature, and feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness not fully grasped is not consciousness, because of the emptiness of a basic nature, up to the very limit of reality is not fully grasped. And why? Because the very limit of reality not fully grasped is not the very limit of reality because of the emptiness of a basic nature. And also, the perfection of wisdom is not fully grasped . . . because of the emptiness of a basic nature. 
 “Lord, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom should analyze how all dharmas are empty of a basic nature, and the investigation of them should be done in such a way that the thinking mind does not consider any dharma at all. Lord, this meditative stabilization sphere of bodhisattva great beings is called sarva­dharmāparigṛhīta; it is vast, prized, infinite, fixed, cannot be stolen, and is not shared in common with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings abiding in that sphere of meditative stabilizations will go forth to the knowledge of all aspects. And that knowledge of all aspects is not fully grasped, because of inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, great emptiness, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of the compounded, the emptiness of the uncompounded, the emptiness of what transcends limits,  the emptiness of no beginning and no end, the emptiness of nonrepudiation, the emptiness of a basic nature, the emptiness of all dharmas, the emptiness of its own mark, the emptiness of not apprehending, the emptiness of a nonexistent thing, the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. And why? Because it cannot be expressed as a causal sign, because a causal sign is an affliction. 
 “What is a causal sign? Form is a causal sign. Feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are causal signs. Eyes are a causal sign. Ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are causal signs. A form is a causal sign. A sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma are causal signs. Eye consciousness is a causal sign. Ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness are causal signs. Eye contact is a causal sign. Ear contact, nose contact, tongue contact, body contact, and thinking-mind contact are causal signs. Feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact is a causal sign. Feeling that arises from the condition of ear contact, feeling that arises from the condition of nose contact, feeling that arises from the condition of tongue contact, feeling that arises from the condition of body contact, and feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact are causal signs. The earth element is a causal sign. The water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element are causal signs. Ignorance is a causal sign.  Volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, and old age and death are causal signs. The applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, the path, the perfections, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the distinct attributes of a buddha, emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, not occasioning anything, the dharma-constituent, the true nature of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the meditative stabilization gateways, and the dhāraṇī gateways are all causal signs. Syllables are causal signs. A single explanation, two explanations, and a number of different explanations are causal signs. Clairvoyance is a causal sign. All the meditative stabilization gateways and dhāraṇī gateways are causal signs. They are all called affliction.
 “If the perfection of wisdom were something that could be taken up through a causal sign, then the religious mendicant Śreṇika would not have gained faith in the knowledge of a knower of all here in this teaching. Which faith? The trust, feeling of confidence, and belief in the perfection of wisdom, the feeling that it is reliable, and the thinking about, weighing, and testing of it—and this not by way of a causal sign and not by way of the absence of a causal sign. Thus, it should be taken up by way of no causal sign and no absence of causal sign, without taking it up. 
 “The religious mendicant Śreṇika also believed in this knowledge of a knower of all. As a faith follower he comprehended with partial knowledge, and having thus comprehended did not fully grasp form. Similarly, he did not fully grasp feeling, perception, volitional factors,  or consciousness. And why? Because he did not apprehend a grasper of all dharmas that are empty of their own mark. And again, why? Because he did not see that knowledge as an inner attainment and clear realization, and he did not see it as an outer one. He did not see that knowledge as an inner and outer attainment and clear realization, and he did not see that knowledge as some other attainment and clear realization either. 
 “And why? Because he did not apprehend and see any dharma with which he might know, or which might know, or which he might know, because he did not see that knowledge inside form, and he did not see that knowledge inside feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; he did not see that knowledge outside form, and he did not see that knowledge outside feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; he did not see that knowledge inside and outside of form, and he did not see that knowledge inside and outside of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; and he did not see that knowledge as other than form, and he did not see that knowledge as other than feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, because of the emptiness of outer and inner. Similarly, up to he did not see that knowledge inside the very limit of reality, he did not see that knowledge outside the very limit of reality, he did not see that knowledge inside and outside the very limit of reality, and he did not see that knowledge as other than the very limit of reality,  because of the emptiness of outer and inner.
 “The religious mendicant Śreṇika believed in this one of many explanations, and, because he could not find all dharmas, as a faith follower believing in it he took the true nature of dharmas as his authority and entered into the knowledge of a knower of all. Believing like that, he did not fully grasp any dharma, because he did not pay attention to any causal signs. He did not apprehend any dharma to seize or release, because all dharmas are not seized and are not released; and he did not even falsely project nirvāṇa, because he did not falsely project all dharmas. Lord, this—namely, that he does not fully grasp form, that he does not fully grasp feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness because he has not fully grasped all dharmas, up to that he has not fully grasped even the very limit of reality because he has not fully grasped all dharmas—is the state in which the bodhisattva great beings have gone beyond the others; it is the perfection of wisdom. 
 “In the interim they do not pass into complete nirvāṇa until their prayers are completed, up to until the eighteen distinct attributes are completed. And why? Because those prayers are nonprayers, those powers are nonpowers, those fearlessnesses are nonfearlessnesses, those detailed and thorough knowledges are nondetailed and nonthorough knowledges, up to those eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are nonbuddhadharmas—they are not dharmas and they are not nondharmas. Lord, this—namely, that they do not fully grasp form, up to that they do not fully grasp even the very limit of reality because they have not fully grasped all dharmas—is the state in which  bodhisattva great beings have gone beyond the others; it is the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should make an investigation like this: ‘Just what is the perfection of wisdom? Of what is it a perfection of wisdom? Why is it the perfection of wisdom? And what is the perfection of wisdom for?’ If, when they investigate and ponder like that, they see that the dharma that does not exist and that they do not find is the perfection of wisdom, they see it well, because, Lord, all dharmas do not exist and are not found.” 
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, what dharmas do not exist and are not found?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “because of inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, great emptiness, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of the compounded, the emptiness of the uncompounded, the emptiness of what transcends limits, the emptiness of no beginning and no end, the emptiness of nonrepudiation, the emptiness of a basic nature, the emptiness of all dharmas, the emptiness of its own mark, the emptiness of not apprehending, the emptiness of a nonexistent thing, the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the perfection of wisdom, Venerable Śāriputra, does not exist and is not found. The perfection of concentration, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of patience,  the perfection of morality, and the perfection of giving do not exist and are not found. Venerable Śāriputra, inner emptiness does not exist and is not found. Venerable Śāriputra, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature also does not exist and is not found. Venerable Śāriputra, because of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, form does not exist and is not found. Venerable Śāriputra, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not exist and are not found, up to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening do not exist and are not found. The clairvoyances do not exist and are not found, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha do not exist and are not found. Venerable Śāriputra, suchness does not exist and is not found. Venerable Śāriputra, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, up to the very limit of reality does not exist and is not found. Venerable Śāriputra, a stream enterer also does not exist and is not found, up to Venerable Śāriputra, a worthy one, pratyekabuddha, bodhisattva, and buddha do not exist and are not found. Venerable Śāriputra, because of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, all-knowledge also does not exist and is not found. The knowledge of all path aspects does not exist and is not found. Venerable Śāriputra, the knowledge of all aspects also does not exist and is not found.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, if the minds of bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom are not cowed, do not tense up, and do not experience regret—if they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified—you should know that those bodhisattva great beings are not separated from the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, why should you know that bodhisattva great beings  are not separated from the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “form is separated from the intrinsic nature of form, and bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom know that as it really is. Venerable Śāriputra, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is separated from the intrinsic nature of consciousness. Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of giving . . . the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is separated from the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom. Connect this in the same way with Venerable Śāriputra, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are separated from the intrinsic nature of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and the very limit of reality is separated from the intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality.” 
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what intrinsic nature does form have, and what intrinsic nature do feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness have?” 
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “the intrinsic nature of form is not a real thing, and the intrinsic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is not a real thing. Venerable Śāriputra, the intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality is not a real thing, so, Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, form is separated from the intrinsic nature of form, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is separated from the intrinsic nature of consciousness. And similarly, up to the very limit of reality is separated from the intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, form is separated from the defining mark of form. Feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is separated from the defining mark of consciousness. And similarly, up to the very limit of reality is separated from the defining mark of the very limit of reality.
 “A defining mark too is separated from the intrinsic nature of a defining mark. The intrinsic nature of a defining mark is separated from the intrinsic nature of a defining mark.”
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings training in this training go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Exactly so. Venerable Śāriputra, exactly so,” replied Subhūti. “Bodhisattva great beings who are training in this training go forth to the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because all dharmas have not been produced and have not gone forth.” 
 “Venerable Subhūti, why have all dharmas not been produced and not gone forth?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “form is empty of form. You cannot get at its production and going forth. Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of consciousness. You cannot get at its production and going forth. Similarly, up to the very limit of reality is empty of the very limit of reality. You cannot get at its production and going forth. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom are near unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And as they get ever nearer to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening they get ever closer to attaining a perfectly pure body, a perfectly pure voice, a perfectly pure mind, and perfectly pure marks. And as bodhisattva great beings attain an ever more perfectly pure  body, an ever more perfectly pure voice, an ever more perfectly pure mind, and ever more perfectly pure marks, they do not produce a greedy thought, and they do not produce any thought with hatred, confusion, pride, deviousness, envy, miserliness, attachment, or view, so they never are born in a mother’s womb, they constantly and always take birth apparitionally, and, except to bring beings to maturity, they are never born in the terrible forms of life. They will bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield, and pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield without ever being separated from the lord buddhas until awakening in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Therefore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to attain these good qualities and benefits should practice the perfection of wisdom without giving up perseverance. Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom are near unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
This was the eighth chapter, “The Religious Mendicant Śreṇika,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 9: Causal Signs
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom without skillful means  practice form they practice a causal sign; they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. If they practice feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness they practice a causal sign; they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. If they practice ‘form is permanent’ or ‘impermanent’ they practice a causal sign; they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. If they practice ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is permanent’ or ‘impermanent’ they practice a causal sign; they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. If they practice ‘form is happiness’ or ‘suffering’ they practice a causal sign. If they practice ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is ‘happiness’ or ‘suffering’ they practice a causal sign. If they practice ‘form is self’ or ‘no self’ they practice a causal sign. If they practice ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is self’ or ‘no self’ they practice a causal sign. If they practice ‘form is calm’ or ‘not calm’ they practice a causal sign. If they practice ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is calm’ or ‘not calm’ they practice a causal sign. If they practice ‘form is isolated’ or ‘not isolated’ they practice a causal sign. If they practice ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is isolated’ or ‘not isolated’ they practice a causal sign; they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  without skillful means practice the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening they practice a causal sign. Similarly, if they practice the clairvoyances, the perfections, the five eyes, the powers, and the four fearlessnesses, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, they practice a causal sign; they do not practice the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Lord, if it occurs to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, ‘I am practicing the perfection of wisdom,’ they practice what they falsely consider a fact. Those bodhisattva great beings practice just a causal sign. 
 Lord, if it occurs to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, ‘Someone who practices thus, practices the perfection of wisdom and cultivates the perfection of wisdom,’ they practice just a causal sign. You should know that this is the bodhisattva great beings’ lack of skillful means.” 
 Śāriputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, why should one know that this is the bodhisattva great beings’ lack of skillful means?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that possess, form a notion of, and believe in form, and possess, form a notion of, and believe in feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, so they practice an enactment of form, and they practice an enactment of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. I say that this creates their birth, old age, sickness, death, pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief. 
 “Furthermore, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom without skillful means possess, form a notion of, and believe in eyes; possess, form a notion of, and believe in ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind; possess, form a notion of, and believe in a form; possess, form a notion of, and believe in a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma; possess, form a notion of, and believe in eye consciousness; and possess, form a notion of, and believe in ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness.
 “If they possess, form a notion of, and believe in eye contact; if they possess, form a notion of, and believe in ear, nose, tongue, body, or thinking-mind contact; if they possess, form a notion of, and believe in a pleasurable feeling or suffering feeling, or a neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact; if they possess, form a notion of, and believe in a pleasurable feeling or suffering feeling, or a neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling that arises from the condition of ear, nose, tongue, body, or thinking-mind contact; if they possess, form a notion of, and believe in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, five eyes, six clairvoyances, six perfections, four fearlessnesses, four immeasurables, four concentrations, four absorptions, or ten tathāgata powers; if they possess, form a notion of, and believe in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; or if they possess, form a notion of, and believe in the dharmas of the state of a worthy one, of a pratyekabuddha, of a bodhisattva, or of a buddha, they practice an enactment.  I say that those practicing enactments are not released from birth, old age, sickness, death, pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief; they are not released from suffering, and so on. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, if those bodhisattvas do not even have the good fortune to realize the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level, how could they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? It is impossible. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, you should know that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that are without skillful means.” 
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, how do you know when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom have skillful means?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “if, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom they do not practice form; do not practice feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; do not practice the causal sign of form; do not practice the causal sign of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; do not practice ‘form is permanent’ or ‘impermanent’; and similarly do not practice ‘form is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘self’ or ‘no self,’ or ‘calm’ or ‘not calm’; do not practice ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is permanent’ or ‘impermanent,’ ‘happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘self’ or ‘no self,’ or ‘calm’ or ‘not calm’; do not practice ‘form is empty’ or ‘not empty,’ ‘has a sign’ or ‘is signless,’  or ‘is wished for’ or ‘is wishless’; do not practice ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is empty’ or ‘not empty,’ ‘has a sign’ or ‘is signless,’ or ‘is wished for’ or ‘is wishless’; do not practice ‘form is isolated’ or practice ‘it is not isolated’; do not practice ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is isolated’ or practice ‘it is not isolated,’ then, Venerable Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom like that you should know that they have skillful means.
 “And why? Venerable Śāriputra, because that emptiness of form is not form, form is not other than emptiness, and emptiness is not other than form. Form itself is emptiness and emptiness itself is form. And the emptiness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not consciousness, and consciousness is not other than emptiness, and emptiness is not other than consciousness. Consciousness itself is emptiness and emptiness itself is consciousness. Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, because the emptiness of the constituents . . . sense fields . . . and dependent originations . . . and the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . the perfections . . . the clairvoyances . . . the tathāgata powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . up to the emptiness of the distinct attributes of a buddha are not the distinct attributes of a buddha, the distinct attributes of a buddha are not other than emptiness, and emptiness is not other than the distinct attributes of a buddha. Emptiness  is the distinct attributes of a buddha and the distinct attributes of a buddha are emptiness. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom like that you should know that they have skillful means. Venerable Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom like that they have the good fortune to awaken fully to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “If, while practicing the perfection of wisdom they assert any dharma, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Even if they do not so assert, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Even if they do assert when they so assert and do not assert when they do not so assert, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. Even if they neither so assert nor do not so assert, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, why do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom not so assert?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Because, Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom is without an intrinsic nature and cannot be found. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom is not a real thing. Because of this one of many explanations bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not assert ‘I am practicing,’ do not assert ‘I am not practicing,’ do not assert ‘I am practicing when I am practicing and not practicing when I am not practicing,’ and do not assert, ‘I am neither practicing nor not practicing.’ And why? Because they have comprehended all dharmas as things that are not real and do not accept them, so bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom are close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Furthermore, because all dharmas are the same as  things that are not real, that knowledge of all aspects is not two and cannot be divided into two. 
 “It is the vast, prized, infinite, constant meditative stabilization, sarva­dharmānutpāda by name, of bodhisattva great beings that cannot be stolen and is not shared in common with śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas.
Bodhisattva great beings abiding by means of this meditative stabilization quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings abiding by means of this meditative stabilization alone quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, or do they also do so by means of other meditative stabilizations?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “bodhisattva great beings abiding by means of other meditative stabilizations as well also quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are those other meditative stabilizations, abiding by means of which bodhisattva great beings quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “there is a meditative stabilization of bodhisattva great beings, śūraṅgama by name. Abiding by means of that meditative stabilization bodhisattva great beings quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Similarly, there is the meditative stabilization rājamudra, the meditative stabilization siṃhavikrīḍita, the meditative stabilization sucandra, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharmodgata, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­mudra,  the meditative stabilization vilokita­mūrdhā, the meditative stabilization dharma­dhātu­niyata, the meditative stabilization niyata­dhvaja­ketu, the meditative stabilization vajraratna, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­praveśa­mudra, the meditative stabilization samādhirāja, the meditative stabilization raśmipramukha, the meditative stabilization balavyūha, the meditative stabilization samāhitāvasthā­pratiṣṭhāna, the meditative stabilization rājamudra the meditative stabilization balavīrya, the meditative stabilization samudgata, the meditative stabilization nirukti­niyata­praveśa, the meditative stabilization adhivacana­praveśa, the meditative stabilization digvilokita, the meditative stabilization ādhāramudrā, the meditative stabilization asaṃpramoṣa, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­samavasaraṇa­samudra, the meditative stabilization ākāśaspharaṇa, the meditative stabilization vajramaṇḍala, the meditative stabilization dhvajāgra­keyūra, the meditative stabilization indraketu, the meditative stabilization śroto’nugata, the meditative stabilization siṃha­vijṛmbhita, the meditative stabilization vyatyasta, the meditative stabilization ratnajahā, the meditative stabilization vairocana, the meditative stabilization aneṣa, the meditative stabilization aniketasthita, the meditative stabilization niścitta, the meditative stabilization vimalapradīpa, the meditative stabilization anantaprabha, the meditative stabilization prabhākara, the meditative stabilization samantāvabhāsa, the meditative stabilization śuddhasāra, the meditative stabilization vimalaprabha, the meditative stabilization ratikara, the meditative stabilization vidutpradīpa, the meditative stabilization akṣaya, the meditative stabilization ajeya, the meditative stabilization tejovatin, the meditative stabilization kṣayāpagata, the meditative stabilization āniñjya, the meditative stabilization avivartta, the meditative stabilization sūryapradīpa, the meditative stabilization candravimala, the meditative stabilization prajñāpradīpa, the meditative stabilization śuddha­pratibhāsa, the meditative stabilization ālokakara, the meditative stabilization kārākāra, the meditative stabilization jñānaketu, the meditative stabilization vajropama, the meditative stabilization cittasthiti, the meditative stabilization samantāvaloka, the meditative stabilization supratiṣṭhita, the meditative stabilization ratnakoṭi, the meditative stabilization vara­dharma­mudra, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­samatā, the meditative stabilization ratijaha, the meditative stabilization dharma­samudgata­pūrṇa, the meditative stabilization vikiraṇa, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­pada­prabheda, the meditative stabilization samākṣarāvakāra, the meditative stabilization akṣarāpagata, the meditative stabilization ārambanacchedaḥ, the meditative stabilization avikāra, the meditative stabilization aprakāra, the meditative stabilization nāma­niyata­praveśa, the meditative stabilization aniketacārī, the meditative stabilization vitimirāpagata, the meditative stabilization cāritravatin, the meditative stabilization acala, the meditative stabilization viṣayatīrṇa, the meditative stabilization sarva­guṇa­saṃcaya,  the meditative stabilization sthitaniścitta, the meditative stabilization śubha­puṣpita­śuddhi, the meditative stabilization bodhyaṅgavatin, the meditative stabilization ananta­pratibhāna, the meditative stabilization asamasama, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharmātikramaṇa, the meditative stabilization paricchedakara, the meditative stabilization vimativikaraṇa, the meditative stabilization niradhiṣṭhāna, the meditative stabilization ekavyūha, the meditative stabilization ākārābhinirhāra, the meditative stabilization ekākāra, the meditative stabilization ākārānavakāra, the meditative stabilization nairvedhika­sarva­bhava­tamo’pagata, the meditative stabilization sarva­saṃketa­rūta­praveśa, the meditative stabilization sarva­giri­ghoṣākṣara­vimukta, the meditative stabilization jvalanolka, the meditative stabilization anāvilakṣānti, the meditative stabilization lakṣana­pariśodhaṇa, the meditative stabilization sarvākāra­varopeta, the meditative stabilization sarva­sukha­duḥkha­nirabhinandin, the meditative stabilization akṣayakaraṇḍa, the meditative stabilization dhāraṇīmati, the meditative stabilization samyaktva­mithyātva­sarva­saṃgrasana, the meditative stabilization sarva­rodha­nirodha­saṃpraśamana, the meditative stabilization anurodhāprati­rodha, the meditative stabilization vimalaprabha, the meditative stabilization sāravatin, the meditative stabilization paripūrṇa­vimala­candra­prabha, the meditative stabilization vidyutprabha, the meditative stabilization mahāvyūha, the meditative stabilization sarva­loka­prabhākara,  the meditative stabilization samādhisamata, the meditative stabilization arajovirajonaya­yukta, the meditative stabilization araṇa­saraṇa­sarva­samavasaraṇa, the meditative stabilization araṇa­samavasaraṇa, the meditative stabilization anilambha­niketa­nirata, the meditative stabilization tathatā­sthiti­niścitta, the meditative stabilization kāya­kali­saṃpramathana, the meditative stabilization vākkali­vidhvaṃsana­gagana­kalpa, and the meditative stabilization ākāśāsaṃga­vimukti­nirupalepa. Abiding by means of those meditative stabilizations, bodhisattva great beings quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Venerable Śāriputra, those are the meditative stabilizations of bodhisattva great beings. Abiding by means of those meditative stabilizations, bodhisattva great beings quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And there are infinite, countless other meditative stabilization gateways and dhāraṇī gateways as well, having trained in which bodhisattva great beings quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Then through the Lord’s might venerable Subhūti also spoke as follows: “Ah! Venerable Śāriputra, you should know the earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have prophesied the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of bodhisattva great beings abiding by means of those meditative stabilizations, and those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, now dwelling and maintaining themselves in the ten directions in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, those tathāgatas,  worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas too prophesy those bodhisattva great beings. But those who abide by means of those meditative stabilizations do not see even those meditative stabilizations, because they do not falsely project on account of those meditative stabilizations, ‘I have been absorbed; I am absorbed; I will become absorbed.’ Those bodhisattva great beings do not conceive of those. They do not occur to them.”
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, do tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas prophesy bodhisattva great beings who have stood in those meditative stabilizations?”
 “No indeed, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti. “And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom is not one thing, the meditative stabilization another, and the bodhisattva yet another. Bodhisattvas themselves are the meditative stabilization, and the meditative stabilization itself is the bodhisattva.”
 Śāriputra then asked, “If, Venerable Subhūti, the meditative stabilization is not one thing and the bodhisattva another, the bodhisattva not one thing and the meditative stabilization another—that is, if just the meditative stabilization is the bodhisattva and just the bodhisattva is the meditative stabilization because all dharmas are the same, then is it possible to teach the meditative stabilization?” 
 “No indeed, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti.
 “Venerable Subhūti, do the children of a good family form a notion of those meditative stabilizations?” asked Śāriputra.
 “No, Venerable Śāriputra, they do not form such notions,” replied Subhūti.
 “Venerable Subhūti, how do they not form such notions?” asked Śāriputra.
 “They  do not mentally construct them, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti.
 “How, Venerable Subhūti, do they not mentally construct them?” asked Śāriputra.
 “They do not mentally construct those meditative stabilizations because all phenomena do not exist. Venerable Śāriputra, by the same token, those children of a good family do not distinguish them and do not form a notion of them,” replied Subhūti.
 “Why, Venerable Subhūti, do they not distinguish or form a notion of them?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, they do not distinguish or form a notion of them because that meditative stabilization and those bodhisattva great beings do not exist.” replied Subhūti.
 The Lord then complimented venerable Subhūti: “You who are the foremost of śrāvakas at the conflict-free stage have, as is to be expected, given an explanation of what I have taught. Those are eloquent statements. Excellent, excellent, Subhūti. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train like that in the perfection of wisdom. They should train like that in the perfection of concentration, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of patience, the perfection of morality, and the perfection of giving. Similarly, they should train like that in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to they should train like that in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked of the Lord, “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings training like that train in the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings training like that do train in the perfection of wisdom, by way of not apprehending anything. Similarly, they train in the perfection of concentration, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of patience,  the perfection of morality, and the perfection of giving, by way of not apprehending anything. Similarly, they train in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, by way of not apprehending anything, and similarly, up to they train in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, by way of not apprehending anything.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked the Lord, “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings training like that train in the perfection of wisdom by way of not apprehending anything?”
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings training like that do train in the perfection of wisdom, by way of not apprehending anything.”
 “Lord what do you mean, they do not apprehend anything?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend a self, up to they do not apprehend one who knows, or one who sees. Because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend aggregates, constituents, sense fields, or dependent origination; because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend suffering; because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend origination, cessation, or the path; because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm; because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend a stream enterer; because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend a once-returner, a non-returner, the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha; and because of the state of absolute purity  they do not apprehend  . . . up to a bodhisattva, awakening, or a buddha.”
 “Lord, what is purity?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “not being produced, not stopping, not being defilement, not being purification, not appearing, not being apprehended, and not occasioning anything is called the purity of all dharmas.” 
 “Lord, in what dharmas do bodhisattva great beings training like that train?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings training like that do not train in any dharma. And why? Because, Śāriputra, those dharmas do not exist in the way foolish, ordinary people take them to be.” 
 “Lord, how do those dharmas exist?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “as they do not exist, so do they exist. Thus, they do not exist, so one says ‘ignorance.’ ”
 “Lord, why are the nonexistent called ignorance?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “form does not exist because of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not exist because of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, and the perfections do not exist because of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening do not exist because of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha do not exist because of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. 
 “Those foolish people settle down on them because of ignorance and craving, mentally constructing what does not exist. Having settled down on what does not exist, they are attached to the two extremes, namely permanence and annihilation. They do not know, and they do not see. They imagine dharmas where those dharmas do not exist, so they settle down on name and form, they settle down on the applications of mindfulness, up to they settle down on the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. When they have thus settled down on them, they mentally construct dharmas that do not exist, hence they do not know and do not see them. 
 “Why do they not know and see them? Because they do not know and see form. They do not know and see feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. They do not know and see the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, or the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to they do not know and see the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and they are, therefore, counted as fools.
 “They will not emerge. From what will they not emerge? They will not emerge from the desire realm. They will not emerge from the form realm. They will not emerge from the formless realm. They will not emerge from śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha dharmas. 
 “There is nothing in which they place their faith. What does it mean that there is nothing in which they place their faith? They do not place their faith in ‘form is empty of form,’ up to they do not place their faith in ‘awakening is empty of awakening.’ 
 “They do not rest. In what do they not rest? They do not rest in the perfection of giving, and they do not rest  in the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, or the perfection of wisdom. They do not rest on the irreversible level, up to they do not rest in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. That is why they are called fools.
 “They settle down. What does it mean that they settle down? They settle down on form. They settle down on feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. They settle down on the eyes. They settle down on the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind. They settle down on a form. They settle down on a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma. They settle down on the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields. They settle down on greed, hatred, and confusion, they settle down on distortion, up to they settle down on awakening. They are, therefore, counted as fools.”
 “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings training like that not train in the perfection of wisdom and do they not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings training like that do not train in the perfection of wisdom and do not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Why, Lord, do those bodhisattva great beings not train in the perfection of wisdom and not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “here  bodhisattva great beings without skillful means mentally construct a perfection of wisdom and settle down on it. Similarly, they mentally construct a perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving, and settle down on them. They mentally construct all the buddhadharmas, all-knowledge, the knowledge of path aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects. Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, those bodhisattva great beings do not train in the perfection of wisdom and do not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “It is the case, then, Lord,” said Śāriputra, “that bodhisattva great beings training like that do not train in the perfection of wisdom and do not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings training like that do not train in the perfection of wisdom and do not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects,” said the Lord.
 Śāriputra then asked, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom so that while training they do go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend and do not see the perfection of wisdom, then, Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings training in the perfection of wisdom like that go forth to the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending anything. Similarly, when they are practicing the perfection of concentration . . . the perfection of perseverance . . .  the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of morality . . . and the perfection of giving and do not apprehend and do not see the perfection of giving, up to do not apprehend and do not see awakening; when they do not apprehend and do not see all-knowledge, the knowledge of path aspects, up to the knowledge of all aspects, then, Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that are training in the perfection of wisdom and go forth to the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending anything.”
 “Lord, by way of not apprehending what do they go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “they go forth to the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending the emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects.”
This was the ninth chapter, “Causal Signs,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 10: Illusion-Like
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, suppose someone were to ask, ‘Does this illusory being, having trained in the perfection of wisdom, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects or reach the knowledge of all aspects?’ What, Lord, should be said to that questioner? And similarly, suppose someone were to ask, ‘Does this illusory being, having trained in the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving go forth to the knowledge of all aspects or reach the knowledge of all aspects?’ What, Lord, should be said to that questioner? And as to ‘Do they, having trained in, up to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to the knowledge of all aspects, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects or reach the knowledge of all aspects?’—what, Lord, should be said to that questioner?”
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, I will put a question about that right to you. Answer as best you can. What do you think about this: Is illusion one thing and form another? Is illusion one thing and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness another?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: Is illusion one thing and the eyes another, or is illusion one thing and the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind another? Or is illusion one thing and a form another, or is illusion one thing and a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma another? Or is illusion one thing and eye consciousness another, or is illusion one thing and ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness another? Or is illusion one thing and eye contact another, or is illusion one thing and ear contact, nose contact, tongue contact, body contact, and thinking-mind contact another?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: Is illusion one thing and the pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering  feeling from the condition of eye contact another? Is illusion one thing and the pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling from the condition of ear contact, feeling from the condition of nose contact, feeling from the condition of tongue contact, feeling from the condition of body contact, or feeling from the condition of thinking-mind contact another?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: is illusion one thing and the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening another?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: is illusion one thing and emptiness another, is illusion one thing and signlessness another, or is illusion one thing and wishlessness another?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: is illusion one thing and the ten tathāgata powers another, or is illusion one thing and . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha another?” 
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: is illusion one thing and the knowledge of all aspects another?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti. “Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and form another; form is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself form. Illusion is not one thing, Lord,  and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness another; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are themselves illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and the eyes themselves another; the eyes are themselves illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself the eyes. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and the ears . . . nose . . . tongue . . . body . . . and thinking mind another; the thinking mind is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself the thinking mind. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and a form itself another; a form is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself a form. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and a sound . . . a smell . . . a taste . . . a feeling . . . and a dharma another; dharmas are themselves illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself dharmas. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and eye consciousness itself another; eye consciousness is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself eye consciousness. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness another; ear consciousness . . . nose consciousness . . . tongue consciousness . . . body consciousness . . . and thinking-mind consciousness is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself thinking-mind consciousness. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and eye contact another; eye contact is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself eye contact. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and ear contact,  nose contact, tongue contact, body contact, and thinking-mind contact another; ear contact . . . nose contact . . . tongue contact . . . body contact . . . and thinking-mind contact is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself thinking-mind contact. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and the pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling from the condition of eye contact another; the pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling from the condition of eye contact is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself the pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling from the condition of eye contact. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and the pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling from the condition of ear contact, feeling from the condition of nose contact, feeling from the condition of tongue contact, feeling from the condition of body contact, and feeling from the condition of thinking-mind contact another; the pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling from the condition of ear contact . . . feeling from the condition of nose contact . . . feeling from the condition of tongue contact . . . feeling from the condition of body contact . . . and feeling from the condition of thinking-mind contact are themselves illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself the pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling from the condition of thinking-mind contact. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening another; the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are themselves illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and emptiness another;  emptiness is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself emptiness. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and signlessness another; signlessness is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself signlessness. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and wishlessness another; wishlessness is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself wishlessness. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and the ten tathāgata powers another; the ten tathāgata powers are themselves illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself the ten tathāgata powers. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha another; up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are themselves illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and the knowledge of all aspects another; the knowledge of all aspects is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself the knowledge of all aspects.”
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: is there defilement and purification of illusion?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: is there production and stopping of illusion?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: does someone who has no production, no stopping, no defilement,  and no purification train in the perfection of wisdom, or go forth to the knowledge of all aspects, up to or reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti. 
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: is bodhisattva used conventionally as just a name and conventional term for these five appropriating aggregates?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: can you apprehend production, stopping, defilement, or purification of these five appropriating aggregates that are used conventionally as just names and conventional terms?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: does that of which there is no name and causal sign, no conventional term, no designation, no convention, no name and no name designation, no body, no physical activity, no speech, no verbal activity, no thinking mind, no thinking-mind activity—of which there is no production, stopping, defilement, or purification—train in the perfection of wisdom and go forth to the knowledge of all aspects, or do you think it reaches the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “when bodhisattva great beings train in  the perfection of wisdom like that, by way of not apprehending anything, they go forth to the knowledge of all aspects and reach the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Subhūti replied, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings, then, training in the perfection of wisdom like that, who want to go forth to the knowledge of all aspects, should train for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening as an illusory person would train. And why? Because, Lord, these five aggregates are just what should be known to be an illusory person.” 
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: do these five aggregates, having trained in the perfection of wisdom, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects, or do you think they reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti. “And why? Because, Lord, they are nonexistent things, and you cannot apprehend nonexistent things.”
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: do the five dream-like aggregates, having trained in the perfection of wisdom, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti. “And why? Because, Lord, a dream is a nonexistent thing, and you cannot apprehend a nonexistent thing.”
 The Lord then asked, “Subhūti, what do you think about this: do the five aggregates that are like an echo, like an apparition, like an image of a moon in water, like an illusion, like a mirage, like a magical creation, and like a reflection in a mirror, having trained in the perfection  of wisdom, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti. “And why? Because, Lord, an echo is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, also an apparition is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, also an image of a moon in water is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, also an illusion is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, also a mirage is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, also a magical creation is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and also a reflection in a mirror is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and that nonexistence of an intrinsic nature cannot be apprehended. And why? Because, Lord, form is like an illusion, and feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is like an illusion, and what that consciousness is, the six faculties are. They are the five aggregates, and you cannot apprehend them, because of inner emptiness, up to because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.”
 Venerable Subhūti then asked the Lord, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle were to hear this exposition, would they not tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified?”
 “Subhūti,” answered the Lord, “if they are bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle, and are those without skillful means who have not been taken in hand by a spiritual friend, they will tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified.”
 Subhūti asked, “Lord, what skillful means do bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle have not to tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when hearing this exposition?” 
 “Subhūti,” answered the Lord, “here  bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects analytically understand about form its impermanent aspect, but do not apprehend it; and with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects they analytically understand about feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness their impermanent aspect, but do not apprehend it. Subhūti, you should know that this is the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects analytically understand about form its suffering aspect, selflessness aspect, calm aspect, empty aspect, signless aspect, wishless aspect, not occasioning anything aspect, and isolated aspect, but do not apprehend them. Subhūti, you should know that this is the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects analytically understand that form is ‘impermanent,’ but do not apprehend it; and with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects  they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘impermanent,’ but do not apprehend it. Subhūti, you should know that this is the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects analytically understand that form is ‘suffering,’ but do not apprehend it, and they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘suffering,’ but do not apprehend it. Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects analytically understand that form is ‘selfless,’ but do not apprehend it, and they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘selfless,’ but do not apprehend it. Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects analytically understand that form is ‘calm,’ but do not apprehend it, and they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘calm,’ but do not apprehend it. Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects analytically understand that form is ‘empty,’ but do not apprehend it, they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘empty,’ but do not apprehend it; they analytically understand that form is ‘signless,’ but do not apprehend it; they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘signless,’  but do not apprehend it; they analytically understand that form is ‘wishless,’ but do not apprehend it; they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘wishless,’ but do not apprehend it; they analytically understand that form ‘does not occasion anything,’ but do not apprehend it; they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness ‘do not occasion anything,’ but do not apprehend it; they analytically understand that form is ‘isolated,’ but do not apprehend it; and they analytically understand that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘isolated,’ but do not apprehend it. Subhūti, you should know that this is the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom.
 “Subhūti, when those bodhisattva great beings analytically come to that understanding it occurs to them, ‘I will teach all beings the doctrine that “form is impermanent”; and moreover, I will do it by way of not apprehending anything. I will teach all beings the doctrine that “feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are impermanent”; and moreover, I will do it by way of not apprehending anything. I will teach all beings the doctrine that “form is suffering, selfless, calm, empty, signless, wishless, does not occasion anything, and is isolated”; and moreover, I will do it by way of not apprehending anything. I will teach all beings the doctrine that “feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are suffering,” as well as “selfless, calm, empty, signless, wishless, do not occasion anything, and are isolated”; and moreover, I will do it by way of not apprehending anything.’ 
 “Subhūti, with this, the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of giving, they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas pay attention to form being ‘impermanent,’ and moreover do it by way of not apprehending anything. With objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas they pay attention to feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness being ‘impermanent,’ and moreover do it by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “With objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas they pay attention to form being ‘suffering,’ and moreover do it by way of not apprehending anything, up to they pay attention to consciousness being ‘suffering’; and moreover do it by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “They pay attention to form being ‘selfless,’ form being ‘calm,’ form being ‘empty,’ form being ‘signless,’ form being ‘wishless,’ form not occasioning anything,’ and form being ‘isolated,’ and moreover do it by way of not apprehending anything. They pay attention to feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness being ‘selfless,’ consciousness being ‘calm,’ consciousness being ‘empty,’ consciousness being ‘signless,’ consciousness being ‘wishless,’ consciousness ‘not occasioning anything,’ and consciousness being ‘isolated,’ and moreover do it by way of not apprehending anything.
 “Subhūti, with this, the bodhisattva great beings’ untarnished perfection of morality, they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva  great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom analytically understand, tolerate, and accept the impermanent aspect, suffering aspect, selflessness aspect, calm aspect, empty aspect, signless aspect, wishless aspect, not occasioning anything aspect, and isolated aspect of these dharmas, that is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of patience. With this, they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with objects of attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects practicing the perfection of wisdom analytically understand that form is ‘impermanent,’ and moreover do it by way of not apprehending anything. They analytically understand that form is ‘suffering,’ form is ‘selfless,’ form is ‘calm,’ form is ‘empty,’ form is ‘signless,’ form is ‘wishless,’ form ‘does not occasion anything,’ and form is ‘isolated,’ and moreover do it by way of not apprehending anything, without giving up objects of attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, and without forsaking enthusiastic perseverance. With this—the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of perseverance—they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings  practicing the perfection of wisdom do not provide an opportunity for objects of attention connected with śrāvakas or with pratyekabuddhas, or for unwholesome dharmas that are impediments to awakening other than those, that is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of concentration. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like this do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom analytically understand thus: Form is not empty because of the emptiness of form; form is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself form. Feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not empty because of the emptiness of consciousness; consciousness is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself consciousness. The eyes are not empty because of the emptiness of the eyes; the eyes are themself emptiness, and emptiness is itself the eyes. The ears . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . and the thinking mind is not empty because of the emptiness of the thinking mind; the thinking mind is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself the thinking mind. A form is not empty because of the emptiness of a form; a form is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself a form. A sound . . . a smell . . . a taste . . . a feeling . . . and a dharma is not empty because of the emptiness of dharmas; dharmas are themselves emptiness, and emptiness is itself dharmas. Eye consciousness is not empty because of the emptiness of eye consciousness; eye consciousness is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself eye consciousness. Ear consciousness . . . nose consciousness . . . tongue consciousness . . . body consciousness . . . and thinking-mind consciousness is not empty because of the emptiness of thinking-mind consciousness; thinking-mind consciousness is itself emptiness,  and emptiness is itself thinking-mind consciousness. Eye contact is not empty because of the emptiness of eye contact; eye contact is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself eye contact. Ear contact . . . nose contact . . . tongue contact . . . body contact . . . and thinking-mind contact is not empty because of the emptiness of thinking-mind contact; thinking-mind contact is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself thinking-mind contact. Feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact is not empty because of the emptiness of feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact; feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact. Feeling that arises from the condition of ear contact . . . feeling that arises from the condition of nose contact . . . feeling that arises from the condition of tongue contact . . . feeling that arises from the condition of body contact . . . and feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact is not empty because of the emptiness of feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact; feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact. The applications of mindfulness are not empty because of the emptiness of the applications of mindfulness; the applications of mindfulness are themselves emptiness, and emptiness is itself the applications of mindfulness. The right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . and the path is not empty because of the emptiness of the path; the path is itself emptiness, and emptiness is itself the path. The powers, the fearlessnesses, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha are not empty because of the emptiness of the distinct attributes of a buddha; the distinct attributes of a buddha are themselves emptiness, and emptiness is itself  the distinct attributes of a buddha. Subhūti, that is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom. 
 “Subhūti, those are the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings who are practicing the perfection of wisdom, and when they are fully endowed with those means they will not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when they hear this exposition.”
 Subhūti then asked, “Lord, who are those spiritual friends, taken in hand by whom bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when they hear this exposition?”
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings are those who teach them the doctrine that ‘form is impermanent,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. Similarly, they are those who teach them the doctrine that ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are impermanent,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. You should know that they, Subhūti, are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings are those who teach them ‘form is suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘does not occasion anything,’ and is ‘isolated,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level,  or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. And similarly, they are those who teach them ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything’ and are ‘isolated,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. You should know that they, Subhūti, are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings are those who teach them ‘the eyes are impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. Similarly, they are those who teach them the ‘ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. You should know that they, Subhūti, are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings are those  who teach them ‘a form is impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘ does not occasion anything,’ and is ‘isolated,’ and, moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. Similarly, they are those who teach them ‘a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma are impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. You should know that they, Subhūti, are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the spiritual friends of a bodhisattva great being are those who teach them the doctrine that ‘eye consciousness, eye contact, and feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact are impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. Similarly, they are those who teach them the doctrine that ‘ear consciousness, ear contact and feeling that arises from the condition of ear contact,’ and similarly, ‘nose consciousness . . . tongue consciousness . . . body consciousness . . . and thinking-mind consciousness,  thinking-mind contact, and feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact are impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. You should know that they, Subhūti, are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings are those who teach them the doctrine that ‘the applications of mindfulness are impermanent,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. And similarly, they are those who teach them the doctrine that ‘the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path are impermanent,’ and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects. And similarly, they are those who teach them ‘the fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, powers, and distinct attributes of a buddha are impermanent’; who teach them so they will cultivate the knowledge of all aspects; and moreover, teach by way of not apprehending anything, and without dedicating those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, or to anything other than to the knowledge of all aspects.  You should know that they, Subhūti, are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings. If they have taken them in hand they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when they hear this exposition of the perfection of wisdom.”
 Subhūti then asked, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who are unskilled in means fall into the clutches of bad friends, become shunned by spiritual friends, and tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified when they hear this exposition of the perfection of wisdom?”
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, because of lacking attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, apprehend a perfection of wisdom while cultivating it, and falsely project it as the perfection of wisdom; similarly, they apprehend a perfection of concentration . . . a perfection of perseverance . . . a perfection of patience . . . a perfection of morality . . . and a perfection of giving while cultivating it, and also falsely project it as the perfection of giving.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, because of lacking attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, pay attention to ‘form empty of an inner subject,’ pay attention to ‘form empty of an outer object,’ pay attention to ‘form empty of subject and object,’ up to pay attention to ‘form empty of the nonexistence of intrinsic nature.’ They also pay attention to ‘feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness empty of an inner subject,’ pay attention to ‘consciousness empty of an outer object,’ pay attention to ‘consciousness empty of subject and object,’ up to pay attention to ‘consciousness empty of the nonexistence of intrinsic nature.’ They also apprehend that inner emptiness, also apprehend  that outer emptiness, also apprehend that inner and outer emptiness, up to they also apprehend that emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, falsely projecting it by way of apprehending something.
 “They pay attention to ‘the eye empty of an inner subject,’ pay attention to ‘the eye empty of an outer object,’ pay attention to ‘the eye empty of subject and object,’ up to pay attention to ‘the eye empty of the nonexistence of intrinsic nature.’ They also apprehend those emptinesses, falsely projecting them by way of apprehending something. They pay attention to ‘the ear . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . and the thinking mind empty of an inner subject,’ pay attention to ‘the thinking mind empty of an outer object,’ pay attention to ‘the thinking mind empty of subject and object,’ up to pay attention to ‘the thinking mind empty of the nonexistence of intrinsic nature.’ They also apprehend those emptinesses, falsely projecting them by way of apprehending something.” 
Connect this in the same way with “a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma.
 “Similarly, they pay attention to ‘eye consciousness’ and ‘ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind consciousness’; ‘eye contact’ and ‘ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact’; and ‘feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact’ and ‘feeling that arises from the condition of ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact,’ and they pay attention to them ‘empty of an inner subject,’ pay attention to them ‘empty of an outer object,’ pay attention to them ‘empty of subject and object,’ up to pay attention to them ‘empty of the nonexistence of intrinsic nature.’ They also apprehend those emptinesses, falsely projecting them by way of apprehending something.”
Connect this in the same way with “they pay attention to ‘ignorance,’ up to ‘old age and death empty of an inner subject,’ and they pay attention to them ‘empty of an outer object,’ pay attention to them ‘empty of subject and object,’ up to pay attention to them ‘empty of the nonexistence of intrinsic nature.’ They also apprehend those emptinesses, falsely projecting them by way of apprehending something.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti,  bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, because of lacking attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects cultivate the applications of mindfulness, also apprehend those applications of mindfulness, and falsely project them by way of apprehending them. Similarly, they cultivate the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers of a tathāgata, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and they also apprehend them, and falsely project them by way of apprehending them.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom unskilled in means tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified when they hear this exposition of the perfection of wisdom.”
 Subhūti then asked, “Lord, why does a bodhisattva great being fall into the clutches of a bad friend, and, mentored by that bad friend, tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified when they hear this exposition of the perfection of wisdom?”
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, here a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being dissuades them from the perfection of wisdom and dissuades them from the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving, saying, ‘Do not train in these, because they have not been said by the tathāgata, the worthy one, the perfectly complete Buddha; do not listen to these, because they are compositions made up by rhymesters; do not take them up, do not study them, do not bear them in mind,  do not recite them, do not cultivate them, do not properly pay attention to them, and do not teach them to others.’ Subhūti, you should know that this is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being is someone who, when Māra the wicked one, disguised in the form of a buddha, approaches and dissuades them, saying, ‘Child of a good family, what use is cultivating the perfection of wisdom to you, what use is the perfection of concentration to you, what use is the perfection of perseverance to you, what use is the perfection of patience to you, what use is the perfection of morality to you, and what use is cultivating the perfection of giving to you?’ does not teach them it is the work of Māra and does not explain the faults of Māra. Subhūti, you should know that this is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one thus disguised in the form of a buddha approaches a bodhisattva great being and teaches, throws light on, reveals, illuminates, and makes clear a discourse, melodious narration, prediction, account, birth story, introduction, and tale connected with śrāvakas. A bad friend is someone who does not teach the bodhisattva great being that ‘such works of Māra as those will arise,’ that they are the works of Māra. Subhūti, you should know that this is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being is someone who, when Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a buddha approaches a bodhisattva  great being and says, ‘Child of a good family, you do not have the slightest thought of awakening. You are not irreversible from awakening. You are not able to awaken fully to perfect, complete awakening,’ does not explain and teach that such things are the work of Māra. Subhūti, you should know that this is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, about a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being—when Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a buddha approaches a bodhisattva great being and says, ‘Child of a good family, the eyes are empty of self and what belongs to self, and the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are empty of self and what belongs to self; a form is empty of self and what belongs to self, and a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas are empty of self and what belongs to self; eye consciousness is empty of self and what belongs to self, and ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness are empty of self and what belongs to self; eye contact is empty of self and what belongs to self, and ear contact, nose contact, tongue contact, body contact, and thinking-mind contact is empty of self and what belongs to self; feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact is empty of self and what belongs to self, and feeling that arises from the condition of ear contact, feeling that arises from the condition of nose contact, feeling that arises from the condition of tongue contact, feeling that arises from the condition of body contact, and feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact is empty of self and what belongs to self; and similarly, the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and  perfection of wisdom is empty of self and what belongs to self; the applications of mindfulness are empty of self and what belongs to self; the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, path, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of self and what belongs to self, so what use is fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to you?’—it is someone who does not explain and teach to them that such things as those are the works of Māra. Subhūti, you should know that this is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being is someone who, when Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a buddha approaches a bodhisattva, a great being, and says, ‘Child of a good family, the eastern direction is empty of lord buddhas, bodhisattvas, and śrāvakas; there are no buddhas here, there are no bodhisattvas either, and there are no śrāvakas. Similarly, all the ten directions are empty of lord buddhas, bodhisattvas, and śrāvakas; there are no buddhas here, there are no bodhisattvas either, and there are no śrāvakas,’ does not teach and explain to them that such things as those are the works of Māra. Subhūti, you should know that this is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a śrāvaka approaches a bodhisattva great being and dissuades them from attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, and advises and instructs them in objects of attention connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas—someone who does not teach and explain to them that such things as those are works of Māra, Subhūti, you should know is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a preceptor or  teacher of proper conduct approaches a bodhisattva great being and dissuades them from the career of a bodhisattva, dissuades them from attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, and enjoins on them the applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path, enjoins on them the dharmas of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness, and says to them, ‘Child of a good family, you should meditate on these dharmas and directly realize them as a śrāvaka. What use is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to you?’—someone who does not teach and explain to them that such things as those are works of Māra, Subhūti, you should know is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a mother or father approaches a bodhisattva great being and says, ‘Child of a good family, what use is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to you, for the sake of which you pass immeasurable, incalculable eons in saṃsāra experiencing an infinity of your arms, legs, and heads being cut off? Become absorbed in the yoga that effects direct realization of the result of stream enterer, become absorbed in the yoga that effects direct realization of the result of a worthy one’—someone who does not teach and explain to them that such things as those are works of Māra, Subhūti, you should know is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a monk approaches a bodhisattva great being and teaches them ‘the eyes are impermanent’ by way of apprehending something, and similarly ‘the eyes are suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated’; teaches them ‘the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind are impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’  ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated’ by way of apprehending something; and similarly, teaches them ‘the applications of mindfulness are impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated,’ and ‘the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path are impermanent,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are ‘isolated’ by way of apprehending something, up to teaches them ‘the distinct attributes of a buddha are impermanent,’ ‘suffering,’ ‘selfless,’ ‘calm,’ ‘empty,’ ‘signless,’ ‘wishless,’ ‘do not occasion anything,’ and are not enacted,’ ‘isolated’ by way of apprehending something—someone who does not teach and explain to them that such things as those are works of Māra, Subhūti, they should know is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being, and knowing that, they should shun them.”
This was the tenth chapter, “Illusion-Like,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 11: Embarrassment
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, you say ‘bodhisattva’ again and again. What is its basis in reality?”
 The Lord  replied to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, the basis in reality for bodhisattva is an absence of a basis in reality. And why? Subhūti, it is because bodhi and sattva are not produced. Awakening and a being do not have an arising or an existence. They cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, awakening has no basis in reality and a being has no basis in reality, therefore a bodhisattva’s basis in reality is an absence of a basis in reality. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, the track of a bird in space does not exist and cannot be apprehended; similarly, the basis in reality for a bodhisattva does not exist and cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, in a dream a basis does not exist and cannot be apprehended; similarly, the basis in reality for a bodhisattva also does not exist and cannot be apprehended. In a magical illusion a basis does not exist and cannot be apprehended; similarly, in a mirage, a reflection of the moon in water, an echo, an apparition, a reflection in a mirror, and a tathāgata’s magical creation a basis does not exist and cannot be apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva also does not exist and cannot be apprehended.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in suchness a basis does not exist and cannot be apprehended; similarly, the basis in reality for a bodhisattva also does not exist and cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, in unmistaken suchness a basis does not exist and cannot be apprehended, and in unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, and the very limit of reality a basis does not exist and cannot be apprehended.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in an illusory person a basis of form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended. 
 “To illustrate further,  Subhūti, in an illusory person a basis of the eyes does not exist and cannot be apprehended; a basis of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind does not exist and cannot be apprehended, and a basis of a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma does not exist and cannot be apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a basis in the eye consciousness of an illusory person does not exist and cannot be apprehended, and a basis in the ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness of an illusory person does not exist and cannot be apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a basis in reality for an illusory person practicing inner emptiness does not exist and cannot be apprehended, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a basis in reality for an illusory person practicing up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not exist and cannot be apprehended, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a basis in reality for an illusory person practicing the applications of mindfulness does not exist and cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, a basis in reality for an illusory person practicing up to the eightfold noble path, and up to the ten powers of a tathāgata, the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha does not exist and cannot be apprehended, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom  does not exist and cannot be apprehended.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a basis of the form of a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha does not exist and cannot be apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha a basis of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha a basis of the eyes does not exist; a basis of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind does not exist; and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality of a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha a basis of inner emptiness does not exist, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha a basis of the applications of mindfulness does not exist, up to a basis of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the uncompounded element a basis of the compounded element does not exist, and similarly in the compounded element  a basis of the uncompounded element also does not exist. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the absence of production a basis does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. Subhūti, in the absence of stopping, the absence of occasioning anything, the absence of appearing, the absence of being apprehended, the absence of defilement and the absence of purification a basis does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist.”
 “Lord, in the absence of the production of what does a basis not exist, up to in the absence of the defilement, and the absence of the purification of what does a basis not exist?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, in the absence of production a basis of form does not exist; in the absence of production a basis of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness does not exist; up to Subhūti, in the absence of defilement and the absence of purification, a basis of form does not exist; and in the absence of defilement and the absence of purification, a basis of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness does not exist. Similarly, in the absence of production a basis of the constituents and sense fields does not exist, up to in the absence of defilement and the absence of purification, a basis of the constituents and sense fields does not exist. In the absence of production a basis of the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to the powers, fearlessnesses and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha does not exist; up to in the absence of defilement and the absence of purification,  a basis of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha does not exist. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in form a basis in reality for the absence of production, the absence of stopping, the absence of occasioning anything, the absence of appearing, the absence of being apprehended, the absence of defilement and the absence of purification does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness a basis in reality for the absence of production, the absence of stopping, up to the absence of defilement and the absence of purification does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the state of the absolute purity of form a basis for a causal sign does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. As a further instance, Subhūti, in the state of the absolute purity of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness a basis for a causal sign does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. Similarly, in the state of the absolute purity of the constituents, sense fields, and dependent origination a basis for a causal sign does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the state of the absolute purity of the applications of mindfulness a basis for a causal sign does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti,  a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the state of the absolute purity of the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path, up to the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha a basis for a causal sign does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, because of the nonexistence of self, in the state of the absolute purity of the self a basis does not exist, up to because of the nonexistence of one who knows and one who sees, in the state of the absolute purity of one who knows and one who sees a basis does not exist. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, when the disk of the sun rises, a basis for darkness does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the eon conflagration a basis for compounded phenomena does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the morality of a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha a basis for immorality does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the meditative stabilization of a tathāgata a basis for distraction does not exist, in the wisdom of a tathāgata  a basis for intellectual confusion does not exist, in the liberation of a tathāgata a basis for not being liberated does not exist, and in the knowledge and seeing of liberation of a tathāgata nonknowledge and nonseeing of liberation does not exist. Similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the radiance of the sun and moon a basis for darkness does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a basis for the light of the planets, the stars, jewels, and lightning does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a basis for the light of the Cāturmahā­rājika and the Trāyastriṃśa gods, Yāma gods, Tuṣita gods, Nirmāṇarati gods, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods, Brahmakāyika, up to the Akaniṣṭha gods does not exist, up to a basis for the light of a tathāgata does not exist, and similarly, Subhūti, a basis in reality for a bodhisattva when a bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom does not exist. 
 “And why? Because, Subhūti, all those phenomena—that which is the awakening, that which is the bodhisattva, that which is the basis in reality of a bodhisattva—are not conjoined, are not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train in the nonexistence of all phenomena. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know all dharmas.” 
 Subhūti then asked, “Lord, what are all phenomena? How do bodhisattva great beings train in the nonexistence of all phenomena? How do bodhisattva great beings know all phenomena?”
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, all phenomena are said to be wholesome, unwholesome, objects of moral inquiry and not objects of moral inquiry, ordinary and extraordinary, with outflows and without outflows, compounded and uncompounded, basic immorality and not basic immorality, and shared in common and not shared in common. Subhūti, these are said to be all phenomena. Bodhisattva great beings should train in their nonexistence. All those are the phenomena bodhisattva great beings should know.”
 “Lord, what are ordinary wholesome phenomena?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, ordinary wholesome phenomena are said to be honoring mothers, honoring fathers, honoring those following a secluded religious life, and honoring brahmins; attending to the needs of family elders; the basis of meritorious action arisen from giving; the basis of meritorious action arisen from morality and arisen from meditation, that which accompanies service, and skillful means; the ten wholesome actions; the ordinary perception of a bloated corpse, the cleaned-out-by-worms perception, the perception of it as putrid, the bloodied perception, the black-and-blue perception, the savaged perception, the torn-asunder perception, the bones perception,  and the burnt-bones perception; the four ordinary concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions; and the ordinary mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of morality, mindfulness of giving away, mindfulness of the gods, mindfulness of breathing in and out, mindfulness of death, mindfulness of what is included in the body, and mindfulness of disgust. Those, Subhūti, are said to be ordinary wholesome phenomena.” 
 “Lord, what are ordinary unwholesome phenomena?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, ordinary unwholesome phenomena are killing, stealing, illicit sex because of lust, lying, backbiting, insulting, babbling nonsense, coveting, malice, wrong view, anger, bearing a grudge, dissembling, nursing pent-up anger, violence, jealousy, envy, and pride. Those, Subhūti, are said to be ordinary unwholesome phenomena.
 “Lord, what are ordinary neutral phenomena?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, physical karma is neutral, verbal karma is neutral, and thinking-mind karma is neutral. The four great elements are neutral, the five faculties are neutral, the six sense fields are neutral, the four formless absorptions are neutral, the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields are neutral, and maturation is neutral. Those, Subhūti, are said to be ordinary neutral phenomena.”
 “Lord, what are ordinary phenomena?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied,  “Subhūti, ordinary phenomena are said to be the five aggregates, twelve sense fields, eighteen constituents, ten wholesome actions, four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, five clairvoyances, and as many ordinary dharmas not included with extraordinary dharmas as there are. Those are said to be ordinary phenomena.”
 “Lord, what are said to be extraordinary phenomena?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, extraordinary phenomena are said to be the four applications of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four legs of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven limbs of awakening, and the eightfold noble path; the emptiness gateway to liberation, the signless gateway to liberation, and the wishless gateway to liberation; the faculty of coming to understand what has not yet been understood, the faculty of understanding, and the faculty of having understood; meditative stabilization with applied and sustained thought, meditative stabilization without applied thought but with sustained thought, and meditative stabilization without either applied or sustained thought; and knowledge, freedom, mindfulness, introspection, correct attention, and the eight deliverances. 
 “What are the eight deliverances? With form one sees form. This is the first deliverance. With the perception of no form inside one sees form outside. This is the second deliverance. One believes it is pleasant. This is the third deliverance. Totally transcending perceptions of form, setting to rest perceptions of obstruction, not paying attention to perceptions of difference, in endless space one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of endless space. This is  the fourth deliverance. Totally transcending the station of endless space, in endless consciousness one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of endless consciousness. This is the fifth deliverance. Totally transcending the station of endless consciousness, in nothing-at-all one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of nothing-at-all. This is the sixth deliverance. Totally transcending the station of nothing-at-all, in neither perception nor nonperception one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. This is the seventh deliverance. Totally transcending the station of neither perception nor nonperception one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling. This is the eighth deliverance.
 “Then there are the nine serial absorptions. 
 “What are the nine? Detached from sense objects, and detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the first concentration that has applied thought and sustained thought, and enjoyment and pleasure born of detachment. Relieved of applied thought and sustained thought, with an inner serene confidence and a mind that has become a single continuum one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the second concentration that has enjoyment and pleasure born of a meditative stabilization without applied thought and without sustained thought. Because one is free from attachment to enjoyment one abides in equanimity, and with equanimity and recollection and introspection one experiences pleasure with the body, and one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the third concentration without enjoyment, about which the noble beings say, ‘They have equanimity and recollection and dwell in pleasure.’ Because one has forsaken pleasure, has earlier forsaken suffering, has set to rest mental happiness and mental unhappiness and has equanimity that is neither pleasure nor suffering, and has recollection, one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the fourth concentration. Totally transcending of form,  setting to rest perceptions of obstruction, not paying attention to perceptions of difference, in endless space one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of endless space. Totally transcending the station of endless space, in endless consciousness one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of endless consciousness. Totally transcending the station of endless consciousness, in nothing-at-all one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of nothing-at-all. Totally transcending the station of nothing-at-all, in neither perception nor nonperception one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. Totally transcending the station of neither perception nor nonperception one perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling. Those are the nine serial absorptions. 
 “And from inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—these are said to be extraordinary phenomena.
 “What are phenomena with outflows? They are the five aggregates, twelve sense fields, eighteen constituents, four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions. Those are said to be phenomena with outflows.
 “What are phenomena without outflows? They are the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges; up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Those are said to be phenomena without outflows.
 “What are compounded phenomena? The desire realm, form realm, and formless realm, and whatever other phenomena included with the compounded that are not those: the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Those are said to be compounded phenomena.
 “What are uncompounded phenomena? Phenomena that do not arise, that do not pass away, and where otherness does not appear; the extinction of greed, extinction of hatred, and extinction of confusion; suchness, unmistaken suchness, and unaltered suchness; the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, and the very limit of reality—those are said to be uncompounded phenomena.
 “What are phenomena shared in common? They are the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, and five clairvoyances. Those are said to be phenomena shared in common.
 “What are phenomena not shared in common? They are the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, three gateways to liberation, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Those are said to be phenomena not shared in common.
 “Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should train in nonattachment to all phenomena that are empty of their own marks, and in their nonexistence, by not constructing any phenomena and not entertaining any ideas about them. They should know all phenomena in a nondual way.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord,  “Lord, you say ‘bodhisattva great beings.’ Why do you say ‘bodhisattva great beings’?”
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, they will become the foremost of a great mass of beings, a great collection of groups of beings; therefore, they are said to be ‘bodhisattva great beings.’ ”
 “Lord, who are the great mass of beings, the collection of groups of beings of whom bodhisattva great beings will become foremost?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, those said to be the great assembly of beings are those at the Gotra level, those at the Aṣṭamaka level, stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas with the first production of the thought, up to bodhisattva great beings standing on the irreversible level. Subhūti, those are said to be the great mass of beings, the great collection of groups of beings. Bodhisattva great beings will become the foremost of them. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings, having produced the vajra-like thought, should become the foremost of a great mass of beings, of a great collection of groups of beings.”
 “Lord, what is the production of the vajra-like thought?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings produce such thoughts as these: ‘I must buckle on armor for the sake of all beings in infinite saṃsāra’; ‘I must give away all my personal possessions’; ‘I must adopt the same attitude of mind toward all beings’; ‘I must lead all beings to nirvāṇa by means of the three vehicles’; ‘I must understand that  even having led all beings to nirvāṇa, still there are no beings at all in nirvāṇa, and all phenomena are not produced and do not stop’; ‘I must practice the six perfections with the unmixed thought of the knowledge of all aspects’; ‘I must train in the all-pervasive, thoroughly established realization of dharmas’; and ‘I must train in order to awaken to finding and producing within myself all dharmas in accord with one principle, up to in order to awaken to finding and producing within myself infinite dharmas.’ They produce such thoughts, and that, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ production of the vajra-like thought, abiding in which they become the foremost of a great mass of beings, of a great collection of groups of beings, and they do so, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings produce such a thought as this: ‘Whatever feelings of suffering beings in hell, in the animal world, and in the world of Yama experience, I must experience those feelings of suffering for them.’ They produce that thought.
 “There bodhisattva great beings should produce a higher thought like this: ‘Until those beings are in complete nirvāṇa, in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, I must, even for the sake of one being, experience the suffering of beings in hells for many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion eons, and through such means, until those beings are in complete nirvāṇa, in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, I must, for the sake of all beings, experience the suffering of beings in hells. Afterward, having set down wholesome roots,  having accumulated equipment for hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion eons, I must fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for my own sake.’ They should produce that thought. That, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ production of the vajra-like thought, abiding in which they become the foremost of a great mass of beings, of a great collection of groups of beings. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should constantly and always cultivate a prodigious thought, the thought on account of which they become the foremost of all beings. There the bodhisattva great beings’ prodigious thought is that from their first production of that thought onward they will not have a greedy thought, will not have a hateful thought, will not have a confused thought, will not have a violent thought, and will not have a śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha thought. That, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ prodigious thought on account of which they become the foremost of all beings, but without falsely projecting anything. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should have an unshakable thought. There the bodhisattva great beings’ unshakable thought is that their attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects does not falsely project anything. That, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ unshakable thought. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should think to be of benefit and bring happiness to all beings. There, the bodhisattva great beings’ thought to be of benefit and bring happiness is that they protect all beings and do not give up on all beings, but without falsely projecting anything. That, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought to be of benefit  and bring happiness. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that become the foremost of all beings, and they do so, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings must constantly and always want Dharma, enjoy Dharma, delight in Dharma, and be preoccupied with being delighted by Dharma. In regard to that, what is Dharma? It is this: the unbroken unity of all dharmas. 
 “What is it to want Dharma? It is to hope for and want Dharma. That is called to want Dharma.
 “What is it to enjoy Dharma? It is to enjoy and take pleasure in Dharma. That is called to enjoy Dharma.
 “What is it to delight in Dharma? It is to behold good qualities and benefits in Dharma. That is called to delight in Dharma.
 “What is it to be preoccupied with being delighted by Dharma? It is to meditate on and greatly increase just that Dharma. That is called to be preoccupied with being delighted by Dharma.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that become the foremost of a great mass of beings, of a great collection of groups of beings and they do so, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should stand in inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and become the foremost of a great mass of beings, of a great collection of groups of beings, and do so, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should stand in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and in the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and become the foremost of a great mass of beings, of a great collection of groups of beings, and do so, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should abide in the vajropama meditative stabilization, up to abide in the ākāśāsaṃga­vimukti­nirupalepa meditative stabilization and become the foremost of a great mass of beings, of a great collection of groups of beings, and do so, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, having stood in those dharmas, become the foremost of a great mass of beings, of a great collection of groups of beings. Hence, bodhisattvas are said to be great beings.
This was the eleventh chapter, “Embarrassment,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 12: Elimination of Views
Then venerable Śāriputra said to the Lord, “Lord, I too am confident in my readiness to speak the sense in which bodhisattvas are said to be ‘great beings.’ ” 
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “be confident in your readiness to explain the sense in which bodhisattvas are said to be great beings.”
 Śāriputra then explained, “Lord, they reveal the Dharma to beings to eliminate the view of a self and, similarly, the view of a being, a living being, a person, one who lives, an individual, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who makes someone else do, a motivator, one who motivates, one who feels, one who makes someone else feel, one who knows, and one who sees. And by way of not apprehending anything they reveal the Dharma to beings to eliminate the view of annihilation, the view of permanence, the view of existence, and the view  of nonexistence; the view of aggregates, the view of constituents, the view of sense fields, the view of isolation, and the view of dependent origination; and the view of the perfections, the view of the dharmas on the side of awakening, the view of the powers and fearlessnesses, the view of the distinct attributes of a buddha, the view of bringing beings to maturity, the view of the purification of a buddhafield, the view of awakening, the view of the Buddha, the view of the Dharma, the view of the Saṅgha, the view of turning the wheel of the Dharma, and the view of complete nirvāṇa. It is in this sense bodhisattvas are said to be great beings.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked venerable Śāriputra, “What causes bodhisattva great beings to have a view about form, and to have a view about feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, up to to have a view about the distinct attributes of a buddha?”
 “Venerable Subhūti,” replied Śāriputra, “bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom without skill in means apprehend form, and by way of apprehending it produce a view about it. Similarly, they apprehend feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness, and by way of apprehending it produce a view about it, up to they apprehend the distinct attributes of a buddha, and by way of apprehending them produce a view about them. That, venerable Subhūti, causes bodhisattva great beings to have a view about form, up to have a view about the distinct attributes of a buddha, whereas bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means reveal the Dharma by way of not apprehending anything,  to eliminate those views.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, I too am confident in my readiness to speak the sense in which bodhisattvas are said to be great beings.” 
 “Subhūti, be confident in your readiness to speak!” replied the Lord.
 Subhūti then explained, “Lord, because they are unattached even to that unequaled thought of awakening without outflows, a thought equal to the unequaled, a thought not shared in common with any śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, in that sense bodhisattvas are said to be great beings. And why? Because that thought of all-knowing is a thought that is without outflows and does not belong in the three realms—and even to that thought of all-knowing that is without outflows and does not belong they are unattached. That is why they are counted as great beings.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, what is the thought of bodhisattva great beings that is equal to the unequaled, a thought not shared in common with any śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “here after the production of the first thought of awakening they do not see either the production or stopping of any dharma at all—they do not see its decrease, increase, coming, going, defilement, or purification. Venerable Śāriputra, that thought in which there is no production, no stopping, no decrease, no increase, no coming, no going, no defilement, and no purification—in  which there is no śrāvaka thought, no pratyekabuddha thought, no bodhisattva thought, and no perfectly complete buddha thought—that, Venerable Śāriputra, is the thought of bodhisattva great beings that is equal to the unequaled, a thought not shared in common with any śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas.”
 Śāriputra then said, “Venerable Subhūti, you said, ‘Even to that thought of all-knowing that is without outflows and does not belong they are unattached.’ Venerable Subhūti, would not form, then, also be unattached? Would not feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness also be unattached?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “form is also unattached. Feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are also unattached. The thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha are also unattached.” 
 Śāriputra then said, “Venerable Subhūti, you said, ‘That thought of all-knowing is without outflows and does not belong in the three realms.’ Venerable Subhūti, would not the thought of ordinary foolish beings, then, because it is empty of a basic nature, also be without outflows and not belong? Would not the śrāvakas’ and pratyekabuddhas’ thought, and the thought of lord buddhas, then, because they are empty of a basic nature, also be without outflows and not belong?”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti.
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, would not form, because it is empty of a basic nature, also be without outflows and not belong?  Would not feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, because they are empty of a basic nature, also be without outflows and not belong?”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti.
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, would not the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, because they are empty of a basic nature, also be without outflows and not belong?”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti. “The thought of ordinary foolish beings, because it is empty of a basic nature, is without outflows and does not belong. All śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha thought, and the thought of lord buddhas, because it is empty of a basic nature, is also without outflows and does not belong. Form, because it is empty of a basic nature, also is without outflows and does not belong, up to consciousness, because it is empty of a basic nature, is also without outflows and does not belong. The thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, because they are empty of a basic nature, are also without outflows and do not belong.”
 Śāriputra then said, “Venerable Subhūti, you said ‘unattached even to that thought because it is no thought.’ Venerable Subhūti, would not no-form, then, also be unattached to form? Would not no-feeling also be unattached to feeling? Would not no-perception also be unattached to perception? Would not no-volitional factors also be unattached to volitional factors? And would not no-consciousness  also be unattached to consciousness?”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti.
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, would not no-thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, then, also be unattached to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to would not no-distinct attributes of a buddha also be unattached to the distinct attributes of a buddha?”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti. “It is exactly as you say. No-form is unattached to form. No-feeling . . . no-perception . . . no-volitional factors . . . and no-consciousness is also unattached to consciousness. No-constituents . . . no-sense fields . . . no-dependent originations . . . no-dharmas on the side of awakening . . . no-powers . . . no-fearlessnesses . . . no-detailed and thorough knowledges . . . up to and no-distinct attributes of a buddha are unattached to the distinct attributes of a buddha.
 “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that do not apprehend all dharmas, whereby they do not falsely project and do not settle down on reality, even with that thought of awakening equal to the unequaled, a thought not shared in common with any śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas. Therefore, bodhisattvas are said to be great beings.
This was the twelfth chapter, “Elimination of Views,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 13: The Six Perfections
Then venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra said to the Lord, “Lord, I too am confident in my readiness to speak the sense in which bodhisattvas are said to be great beings.” 
 “Pūrṇa, be confident in your readiness to speak,” replied the Lord.
 Pūrṇa then said, “Lord, those beings are armed with great armor,  those beings have set out in a Great Vehicle, and those beings have mounted on a Great Vehicle. It is in this sense, Lord, that bodhisattvas are said to be great beings.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra, “Venerable Pūrṇa, to what extent is it said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Pūrṇa, “here bodhisattva great beings do not practice for awakening for a partial number of beings and do not, having stood in the perfection of giving, give gifts for them, but rather they practice the perfection of giving and give gifts for the sake of all beings. They do not, having stood in the perfection of morality, protect morality for a partial number of beings, but rather they practice the perfection of morality and protect morality for the sake of all beings. They do not, having stood in the perfection of patience, cultivate patience for a partial number of beings, but rather they practice the perfection of patience and cultivate patience for the sake of all beings. They do not, having stood in the perfection of perseverance, exert themselves vigorously for a partial number of beings, but rather they practice the perfection of perseverance and exert themselves vigorously for the sake of all beings. They do not, having stood in the perfection of concentration, generate concentration for a partial number of beings, but rather they practice the perfection of concentration and generate concentration for the sake of all beings. And they do not, having stood in the perfection of wisdom, cultivate wisdom for a partial number of beings, but rather they practice the perfection of wisdom and cultivate wisdom for the sake of all beings.
 “Bodhisattva great beings  do not carve out a certain section of beings and buckle on armor just for them, thinking, ‘I have to lead just this many into the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind; this many I do not have to lead to nirvāṇa. I have to establish just this many in awakening; this many I do not have to establish in awakening.’ On the contrary, bodhisattva great beings buckle on armor for all beings. They think, ‘I myself have to complete the perfection of giving, and I have to connect all beings with the perfection of giving. Similarly, I myself have to complete the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom, and I have to connect all beings with the perfection of wisdom.’
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving give gifts with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects and, having made that wholesome root into something shared in common by all beings, grow it into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the perfection of giving armor of bodhisattvas, great beings practicing the perfection of giving.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, gift-giving bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects do not dedicate it to the level of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the perfection of morality armor of gift-giving bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, gift-giving bodhisattva great beings with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects have forbearance for and belief in those phenomena. That is the perfection of patience armor of gift-giving bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, gift-giving bodhisattva great beings with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects do not slack in perseverance. That is the perfection of perseverance armor of gift-giving bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, gift-giving bodhisattva great beings with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects make their minds one-pointed without providing an opportunity for thoughts connected with śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas. That is the perfection of concentration armor of gift-giving bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, because gift-giving bodhisattva great beings have only that as their focus and have attended to the perception that all dharmas are conjured up, they do not apprehend a giver, do not apprehend giving, and do not apprehend a recipient. That is the perfection of wisdom armor of gift-giving bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects do not grasp a causal sign of those perfections and do not apprehend them, you should know, Venerable Śāriputra, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that are armed with great armor. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality standing with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects give gifts and, having made that into something shared in common by all beings, dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the perfection of giving of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality do not hanker after even śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha levels, not to mention the level of an ordinary person. That is the perfection of morality of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects have forbearance for and belief in doing those things. That is the perfection of patience of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects do not slack in perseverance and do not tense up. That is the perfection of perseverance of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality abide with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects without providing an opportunity for thoughts connected with śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, and having made the mind they have produced into something shared in common by all beings, dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.  That is the perfection of concentration of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality abiding with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects attend to the perception that all dharmas are conjured up. They do not falsely project and apprehend morality because of its emptiness of a basic nature. That is the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality like that incorporate all six perfections, they are said to be armed with great armor.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of patience with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, give gifts and, having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the perfection of giving armor of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of patience.
 “The perfection of morality, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration when practicing the perfection of patience are similar.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, in order to fully accomplish all the buddhadharmas and bring all beings to maturity through wisdom, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of patience with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, having made  those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of patience.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, give gifts and, having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the perfection of giving of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of perseverance.
 “The perfection of morality, perfection of patience, and perfection of concentration when practicing the perfection of perseverance are similar.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, cultivate the perfection of wisdom and, having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That is the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of perseverance.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, give gifts and, having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That is the perfection of giving of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of perseverance.
 “The perfection of morality, perfection of patience, and perfection of perseverance when practicing the perfection of concentration are similar.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration, cultivating the perfection of wisdom, attend to the perception that all dharmas are conjured up. With objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, they make those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, and they grow them into unsurpassed, perfect,  complete awakening. That is the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of concentration.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, give gifts with the purity of the three spheres and, having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That is the perfection of giving of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom.
 “The perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration when practicing the perfection of wisdom are similar.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom, cultivating  the perfection of wisdom, attend to the perception that all dharmas are like an illusion, a dream, an apparition, an echo, a reflection in the mirror, and a magical creation. Standing with objects of attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, but with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, they make those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings and grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That is the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom.
 “Thus, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings standing in each of the six perfections perfect all six perfections.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings become absorbed in the concentrations but do not dwell on the experience, are not captured by them, and are not reborn under their power. They become absorbed in the immeasurables and formless absorptions but do not dwell on the experience, are not captured by them, and are not reborn under their power. That, Venerable Śāriputra, you should know is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom endowed with skillful means. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings dwell in a vision of isolation and dwell in a vision of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness in the concentrations, the immeasurables, and the formless absorptions but still do not actualize the very limit of reality. Venerable Śāriputra, that is the great skillful-means armor of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom. In that way bodhisattva great beings, Venerable Śāriputra,  are said to be armed with great armor.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, the lord buddhas standing in the ten directions also cry out with cries of delight and raise their voices in praise of bodhisattva great beings thus armed with great armor, announcing their titles, saying the names of those bodhisattvas out loud, and proclaiming, ‘A bodhisattva great being armed with great armor in such-and-such a world system is bringing beings to maturity and purifying a buddhafield.’ ”
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Pūrṇa, to what extent have bodhisattva great beings set out in a great vehicle, and what is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Pūrṇa, “here when bodhisattva great beings who practice the six perfections are practicing the perfection of giving, they complete and dwell in the first concentration, where there is detachment from sense objects and detachment from wrong, unwholesome dharmas, and have applied thought and have sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment. Similarly, they attain and dwell in the second, third, and fourth concentrations. 
 “They dwell having pervaded the ten directions of a world that is vast because of the dharma-constituent and that extends as far as the space element with a vast, inclusive, infinite, nondual mind endowed with love without enmity, unrivaled, not harmful, and well cultivated. Similarly, they dwell having pervaded the ten directions of a world that is vast because of the dharma-constituent and that extends as far as the space element with a vast, inclusive, infinite, nondual mind endowed with compassion, endowed with joy, and endowed with equanimity without enmity, unrivaled, not harmful,  and well cultivated.
 “Similarly, they attain and dwell in the station of endless space, the station of endless consciousness, the station of nothing-at-all, and the station of neither perception nor nonperception.
 “Those are the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions of bodhisattva great beings. When bodhisattva great beings who practice the perfection of giving set out into and arise from those concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions, they make those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings as well, and they grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” 
Construe when practicing the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration as above.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who practice the perfection of wisdom become absorbed in the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, and the four formless absorptions. When bodhisattvas dwell in those concentrations, those immeasurables, and those formless absorptions, becoming absorbed into and arising from those concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions, they pay attention to the attributes, tokens, and signs of space. Practicing the perfection of wisdom, with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, they make those wholesome roots, and others as well, into something shared in common by all beings, and  they grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings dwell having pervaded one direction, up to dwell having pervaded the ten directions of a world as vast as the dharma-constituent and as far-reaching as the space element with a vast, inclusive, infinite, nondual mind endowed with love without enmity, unrivaled, not harmful, and well cultivated. And similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings dwell having pervaded one direction, up to dwell having pervaded the ten directions of a world as vast as the dharma-constituent and as far-reaching as the space element with a vast, inclusive, infinite, nondual mind endowed with compassion, endowed with joy, and similarly endowed with equanimity without enmity, unrivaled, not harmful, and well cultivated. That is said to be the bodhisattva great beings’ meditative stabilization. 
 “Furthermore, bodhisattva great beings with a mind connected with the knowledge of all aspects, preceded by great compassion, explain and demonstrate, illuminate, reveal, and make clear the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions to others in order to destroy the afflictions of all beings, properly demonstrating the experience of and faults in them, and the release from them. This is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of giving.
 “With just that attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, they do the suppressing meditation on the first, up to the fourth concentration, standing in the first, up to the fourth concentration—that is, they do not provide an opportunity for the production of other thoughts connected with śrāvaka thoughts or with pratyekabuddha thoughts. This is the bodhisattva great beings’ untarnished perfection of morality.
 “Bodhisattva great beings dwelling with just that attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects think, ‘I will teach the Dharma in order to put an end to the afflictions of all beings.’ The enjoyment, toleration, investigation, understanding of, and pondering on that attention is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of patience.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings with that attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects make all the wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, and they grow them into the knowledge of all aspects without relaxing their perseverance. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of perseverance.
 “When bodhisattva great beings with that attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects become absorbed in and emerge from all those concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions and, without falling to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, also make the wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings and grow them into the knowledge of all aspects, that is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of concentration.
 “When bodhisattva great beings with that attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects understand analytically the branches of the first concentration and the branches of the second, of the third, and of the fourth concentration in their impermanent  aspect, suffering aspect, selflessness aspect, calm aspect, empty aspect, signless aspect, and wishless aspect, that is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom.
 “That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle that is the six perfections, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is fully meditating on the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, fully meditating on the meditative stabilizations on emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness that are gateways to liberation, and fully meditating on the powers, the fearlessnesses, up to and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings become absorbed in the meditative stabilization on loving-kindness and become dedicated to the thought ‘I will protect all beings’; become absorbed in the meditative stabilization on compassion and dedicated to empathy and compassion for all beings; become absorbed in the meditative stabilization on joy and dedicated to the thought ‘I will free all beings’; and become absorbed in the meditative stabilization on equanimity and dedicated to putting an end to the outflows of all beings. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the perfection of giving of bodhisattva great beings practicing the immeasurables. 
 “When bodhisattva great beings  become absorbed in and emerge from those attributes, tokens, and signs of those concentrations and immeasurables and dedicate it not to the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha level but only to the knowledge of all aspects, that is the untarnished perfection of morality of bodhisattva great beings practicing the immeasurables.
 “When bodhisattva great beings stand in those concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions without mixing them up and do not hanker after the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, or both of them, but tolerate and accept the knowledge of all aspects, that is the perfection of patience of bodhisattva great beings practicing the immeasurables.
 “When bodhisattva great beings with the thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects do not give up the endeavor to abandon unwholesome dharmas and fully complete wholesome dharmas, that is the perfection of perseverance of bodhisattva great beings practicing the immeasurables.
 “When bodhisattva great beings become absorbed in those concentrations, in those immeasurables, and even in those formless absorptions but are not reborn under the power of the concentrations, immeasurables, or formless absorptions, do not dwell on the experience of them, and are not captured by them, that is the perfection of concentration of bodhisattva great beings practicing the immeasurables.
 “When bodhisattva great beings with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects become absorbed in and emerge again from those concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions, understanding analytically  their impermanent aspect, suffering aspect, selflessness aspect, calm aspect, empty aspect, signless aspect, and wishless aspect but without entering into the secure state of a śrāvaka, and without entering into the secure state of a pratyekabuddha either, that is the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings.
 “That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is a knowledge of inner emptiness by way of not apprehending anything, up to a knowledge of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature by way of not apprehending anything. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is the knowledge of all dharmas that is an unscattered thought in meditative equipoise. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is where knowledge that ‘it is permanent’ does not happen, and where knowledge that ‘it is impermanent,’ ‘it is happiness,’ ‘it is suffering,’ it has a self,’ ‘it is selfless,’ ‘it is calm,’ ‘it is not calm,’ ‘it is empty,’ ‘it is not empty,’ ‘it has a sign,’ ‘it is signless,’ it is wished for,’ and ‘it is wishless’  does not happen, and that again by way of not apprehending anything. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is where knowledge does not happen at a time in the past, where knowledge does not happen at a time in the future, where knowledge does not happen in the present time, and yet where they are also not non-knowers of the three time periods, and that again by way of not apprehending anything. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is where knowledge does not happen in the desire realm, where knowledge does not happen in the form realm or the formless realm, and yet where they are also not non-knowers of the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm, and that again, Venerable Śāriputra, by way of not apprehending anything. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is where knowledge of ordinary dharmas does not happen; where knowledge of extraordinary dharmas, of dharmas with outflows and without outflows, and of compounded and uncompounded dharmas does not happen; and yet where they are also not non-knowers of ordinary dharmas, and are not non-knowers of extraordinary dharmas, of dharmas with outflows and without outflows, of compounded and uncompounded dharmas, and that again,  Venerable Śāriputra, by way of not apprehending anything. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle.” 
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra, “Venerable Pūrṇa, to what extent has a bodhisattva great being mounted on the Great Vehicle?”
 Pūrṇa said, “Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom mount up on the perfection of giving. They do not apprehend a perfection of giving, they do not apprehend a bodhisattva, and they do not apprehend a recipient. It is said that bodhisattva great beings have ‘mounted up on the perfection of giving’ by way of not apprehending anything in that way. They have mounted up on the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration like that as well. Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom mount up on the perfection of wisdom. They do not apprehend a perfection of wisdom, they do not apprehend a bodhisattva, and they do not apprehend attention. Venerable Śāriputra, it is said that bodhisattva great beings have ‘mounted up on the perfection of wisdom’ by way of not apprehending anything in that way. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings meditate on inner emptiness with a thought connected with the knowledge of all aspects without any admixture because of the investigation of the meditation, and that meditation, again, by way of not apprehending anything. They meditate up to on the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature with a thought connected with the knowledge of all aspects without any admixture  because of the investigation of the meditation, and that meditation, again, by way of not apprehending anything. Venerable Śāriputra, it is said that bodhisattva great beings have ‘mounted up on the Great Vehicle’ in that way. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings meditate on the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening with thoughts connected with the knowledge of all aspects without any admixture because of the investigation of the meditation, and that meditation, again, by way of not apprehending anything. They meditate on the meditative stabilizations on emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness with thoughts connected with the knowledge of all aspects without any admixture because of the investigation of the meditation, and that meditation, again, by way of not apprehending anything. They meditate on the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha with thoughts connected with the knowledge of all aspects without any admixture because of the investigation of the meditation, and that meditation, again, by way of not apprehending anything. Venerable Śāriputra, it is said that bodhisattva great beings have ‘mounted up on the Great Vehicle’ in that way. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings know that bodhisattva is just a convention because beings cannot be found; that form is just a name because form cannot be found; up to that feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness is just a name because consciousness cannot be found; that eye is just a name because eye cannot be found; up to that thinking mind is just a name because thinking mind cannot be found, and so too with the constituents,  sense fields, dependent origination, thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They know that inner emptiness is just a name because inner emptiness cannot be found, up to that emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is just a name because the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature cannot be found; that buddhadharma is just a name because a buddhadharma cannot be found; that suchness . . . , the true nature of dharmas . . . , the dharma-constituent . . . , the certification of dharmas . . . , and the very limit of reality is just a name because the very limit of reality cannot be found; and that awakening . . . and buddha is just a name because a buddha cannot be found. Venerable Śāriputra, it is said that bodhisattva great beings have ‘mounted up on the Great Vehicle’ in that way.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, because they have completed the clairvoyances, bodhisattva great beings from the first thought of awakening up until sitting at the site of awakening bring beings to maturity, roam from buddhafield to buddhafield, and with whatever worship and attendance is suitable, in whichever the buddhafield, they respect, revere, honor, and worship the lord buddhas. They hear just this—that is, the Great Vehicle doctrine—from those lord buddhas, and mounted on this Great Vehicle they pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity. But they have no notion of a buddhafield, and they have no notion  of beings either. They stand on the nondual ground, intentionally appropriate whatever sort of body is able to look after the needs of beings, and until they gain the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, they are never separated from that vehicle. And having gained the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, they turn the wheel of the Dharma that all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and the world with its gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and ghosts, cannot turn. When they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, the lord buddhas living in as many worlds in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River raise their voices in praise of them, proclaiming their glory and making this proclamation: ‘In such-and-such a vast world system the bodhisattva great being so-and-so, having mounted up onto the Great Vehicle, has gained the knowledge of all aspects, and having gained the knowledge of all aspects has turned the wheel of Dharma.’ Similarly the lord buddhas living in as many worlds as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, raise their voices in praise of them, proclaiming their glory and making this proclamation: ‘In such-and-such a world system the bodhisattva great being so-and-so, having mounted up onto the Great Vehicle, has gained the knowledge of all aspects, and having gained the knowledge of all aspects has turned the wheel of Dharma.’ Venerable Śāriputra, it is said that bodhisattva great beings  have ‘mounted up onto the Great Vehicle’ in that way.”
This was the thirteenth chapter, “The Six Perfections,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 14: Neither Bound nor Freed
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, you say ‘armed with great armor’ again and again. Lord, to what extent are bodhisattva great beings armed with great armor?”
 The Lord said, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings, having become armed with great armor—that is, armed with perfection of giving armor, and armed with perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom armor; armed with applications of mindfulness armor, and armed with right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path armor; armed with inner emptiness armor, up to armed with emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature armor; and armed with powers armor, armed with fearlessnesses armor, armed with detailed and thorough knowledges armor, and armed with distinct attributes of a buddha armor—and having become armed with the armor of the knowledge of all aspects and the body of a buddha, they pervade world systems in the great billionfold world system with light and shake the earth. Having blown out all the fires in the hell dwellings, extinguished the sufferings of the beings in the hells, and caused them to know their suffering is extinguished, those bodhisattvas  say, ‘I bow to you, tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha!’ proclaiming the name out loud, and then those beings in the hells, having heard the sound buddha, find pleasure and mental happiness. They emerge from those hells just because of that pleasure and mental happiness, and wherever lord buddhas are standing and can be seen and can be pleased they take birth in those world systems, reborn as gods and humans. 
 “Similarly, beings emerge from animal dwellings and the world of Yama and are reborn wherever lord buddhas are standing. 
 “Similarly, they pervade with light as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, and they shake them in the six ways. Having blown out all the fires in the hell dwellings, extinguished the sufferings of the beings in the hells, and caused them to know their suffering is extinguished, those bodhisattvas say ‘I bow to you, tathāgata, worthy one, perfect complete Buddha!’ proclaiming the name out loud. Then those beings in the hells, having heard the sound buddha, find pleasure and mental happiness. They emerge from those hells just because of that pleasure and mental happiness, and wherever lord buddhas are standing and can be seen and attended to, they take birth in those world systems, reborn as gods and humans. 
 “Similarly, those beings die in animal dwellings and the world of Yama  and take birth in whichever world systems lord buddhas are standing. 
 “Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, were a clever magician or magician’s apprentice to have conjured up the hells, animal dwellings, and the worlds of Yama in front of a gathering of beings at the junction of two main roads, and having conjured them up were they to proclaim to those beings the word ‘Buddha,’ the word ‘Dharma,’ and the word ‘Saṅgha,’ then, when those they have conjured up have emerged from those hells, animal dwellings, and the worlds of Yama because of the word Buddha, the word Dharma, and the word Saṅgha, Subhūti, what do you think, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have caused any beings to emerge from the hells, animal dwellings, or the worlds of Yama?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings have released beings from the three terrible forms of life in an unbounded, infinite number of world systems, still no beings at all have been released. And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature of dharmas. Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of giving and armed with great armor conjure up a great billionfold world system made of beryl.  Having conjured up a great billionfold world system made of beryl, they conjure up a splendid array of a wheel-turning emperor. Having conjured up a splendid array of a wheel-turning emperor, they give food to those seeking food, and similarly they give drink, clothes, transport, perfume, flower garlands, flowers, incense, creams, powders, requirements, houses, bedding, shawls, and requirements for sustaining themselves, as well as medicines, gold, silver, jewels, gems, corals, conch shells, crystals, pearls, and ornaments—whatever requirements are appropriate. Having given food to those seeking food, up to and having given whatever requirements are appropriate, they then teach those beings the Dharma—that is, just this Dharma conjoined with the six perfections—and, having heard that exposition of the Dharma those beings, never become separated from the six perfections right up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, suppose a clever magician or magician’s apprentice were to have conjured up a huge crowd of beings in front of a gathering of other beings at the junction of two main roads and given food to those seeking food, up to and given whatever requirements are appropriate. What do you think, Subhūti, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have given anything to anybody?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings conjure up a splendid array of a wheel-turning emperor and give food to those seeking food, up to give whatever requirements are appropriate, still they do not give anything to any being.  And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature of dharmas. Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of morality and intentionally take birth. Born in the family of a wheel-turning emperor, they stand in that wheel-turning majesty, establish beings in the ten wholesome actions, establish beings in the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, and the four formless absorptions, up to establish beings in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and those beings never become separated from that teaching right up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, suppose a clever magician or magician’s apprentice were to have conjured up a huge crowd of beings in front of a gathering of other beings at the junction of two main roads and established them in the ten wholesome actions, up to established them in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. What do you think, Subhūti, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have established any beings in the ten wholesome actions, up to would they have established them in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha?” 
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings establish an unbounded, infinite number of beings in the ten wholesome actions, up to establish them in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, still they do not establish any beings  in the ten wholesome actions, up to they do not establish any beings in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature of dharmas. Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience cause beings to engage in the perfection of patience and establish them in it. And how, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience cause beings to engage in the perfection of patience and establish them in it? Subhūti, after bodhisattva great beings have produced their first thought of awakening they arm themselves with great armor in this way: they think, ‘Even if all beings deal me a blow with a stick, a stone, their fists, a knife, or a sword, I will not let myself feel any sort of mental anguish,’ and they also establish all beings in such patience.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, were a clever magician or magician’s apprentice to have conjured up a huge crowd of beings in front of a gathering of other beings at the junction of two main roads and caused them to engage in the perfection of patience and established them in it, what do you think, Subhūti, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have established any beings in the perfection of patience?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings establish an unbounded, infinite number of beings in the perfection of patience, still they do not establish any beings in the perfection of patience. And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature  of dharmas. Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance cause beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of perseverance. And how, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance cause beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of perseverance? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects cause beings to take up, enter into, and be established in physical and mental perseverance.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, were a clever magician or magician’s apprentice to have conjured up a huge crowd of beings in front of a gathering of other beings at the junction of two main roads and caused them to take up, enter into, and be established in physical and mental perseverance, what do you think, Subhūti, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have caused any beings to take up, enter into, and be established in physical and mental perseverance?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings establish all beings in physical and mental perseverance, still they do not cause any beings to take up, enter into, and be established in physical and mental perseverance. And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature of dharmas.  Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration cause all beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of concentration. And how, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration cause all beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of concentration? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the sameness of all dharmas do not consider any dharma to be wavering or not wavering. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of concentration in that way, and they cause all beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of concentration like that. And those whom they have caused to take it up never become separated from that perfection of concentration, right up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, were a clever magician or magician’s apprentice to have conjured up a huge crowd of beings in front of a gathering of other beings at the junction of two main roads and caused them to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of concentration, what do you think, Subhūti, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have caused any beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of concentration?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings  establish all beings in the perfection of concentration, still they do not cause any beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of concentration. And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature of dharmas. Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom cause all beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of wisdom. And how, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom cause all beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of wisdom? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend the production, cessation, defilement, purification, proximity, or remoteness of any dharma. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of wisdom in that way, and they cause all beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of wisdom like that. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, were a clever magician or magician’s apprentice to have conjured up a huge crowd of beings in front of a gathering of other beings at the junction of two main roads and caused them to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of wisdom, what do you think, Subhūti, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have caused any beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the perfection of wisdom?”
 “No, Lord,”  answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings establish all beings in the perfection of wisdom, still they do not establish any beings in the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature of dharmas. Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings armed with great armor, having gone to as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east, in the same way they personally stand in the perfection of giving they cause the beings who are standing in those world systems to take up the perfection of giving, and to enter into and be established in it. Similarly, in the same way they personally stand in the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom, they also cause those beings to take up . . . up to the perfection of wisdom, and to enter into and be established in them. They teach the Dharma—that is, just this Dharma conjoined with the six perfections—and, having heard that Dharma, those beings never become separated from the six perfections, right up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Similarly, having gone to as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the directions to the south, west, and north; the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest; and below and above, in the same way that they personally stand in the perfection of giving  they cause the beings who are standing in those world systems to take up the perfection of giving, and to enter into and be established in it. Similarly, in the same way they personally stand in the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom they also cause those beings to take up . . . up to the perfection of wisdom, and to enter into and be established in them. They teach the Dharma—that is, just this Dharma conjoined with the six perfections—and, having heard that Dharma, those beings never become separated from the six perfections right up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, were a clever magician or magician’s apprentice to have conjured up a huge crowd of beings in front of a gathering of other beings at the junction of two main roads and caused them to take up, enter into, and be established in the six perfections, what do you think, Subhūti, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have caused any beings to take up, enter into, and be established in the six perfections?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings establish all beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east and in all ten directions in the six perfections, still they do not establish any beings in the six perfections. And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature of dharmas. Subhūti, it is said bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.
 “Furthermore,  Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having become armed with great armor, stand with their thought connected with the knowledge of all aspects without giving an opportunity for the production of other thoughts, such as ‘I have to establish just this many in the perfection of giving; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in the applications of mindfulness; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in the result of stream enterer; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in the result of once-returner; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in the result of non-returner; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in the state of a worthy one; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; this many I do not have to establish. I have to establish just this many in the knowledge of all aspects; this many I do not have to establish.’ On the contrary, they think, ‘I have to establish an unbounded, infinite number of beings in the six perfections, I have to establish them in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and I have to establish them in the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. I have to establish them in the result of stream enterer, and I have to establish them in the result of once-returner, in the result of non-returner,  in the state of a worthy one, and in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. I have to establish an unbounded, infinite number of beings in the knowledge of all aspects.’
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, were a clever magician or magician’s apprentice to have conjured up a huge crowd of beings in front of a gathering of other beings at the junction of two main roads and to have produced the thought, ‘I have to establish an unbounded, infinite number of beings in the six perfections, I have to establish them in the applications of mindfulness, in the eightfold noble path, and I have to establish them in . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; I have to establish them in the result of stream enterer, up to I have to establish them in the state of a worthy one, and in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; I have to establish them in the knowledge of all aspects,’ what do you think, Subhūti, would that magician or magician’s apprentice have established any beings in the six perfections, up to established any beings in the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No, Lord,” answered Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even if bodhisattva great beings were to produce the thought, ‘I have to establish an unbounded, infinite number of beings in the six perfections, up to the knowledge of all aspects furnished with the best of all aspects,’ they would not have produced a thought for the welfare of any being. And why? Because, Subhūti, this is just the way things are, given the illusory nature of dharmas. Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.”
 Subhūti then said, “The way I understand what you, Lord, have said is that those bodhisattva great beings should be understood to be armed with no armor because all dharmas, given the illusory nature of dharmas, are empty of their own mark. And why? Because, Lord, form is empty of form, and because feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of consciousness; because eyes are empty of eyes, and because ears . . . nose . . . tongue . . . body . . . and thinking mind is empty of thinking mind; because a form is empty of a form, and because a sound . . . a smell . . . a taste . . . a feeling . . . and a dharma is empty of a dharma; because eye consciousness is empty of eye consciousness, and because ear consciousness . . . nose consciousness . . . tongue consciousness . . . body consciousness . . . and thinking-mind consciousness is empty of thinking-mind consciousness; because eye contact is empty of eye contact, and because ear contact . . . nose contact . . . tongue contact . . . body contact . . . and thinking-mind contact is empty of thinking-mind contact; because feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact is empty of feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact, and because feeling that arises from the condition of ear contact . . . feeling that arises from the condition of nose contact . . . feeling that arises from the condition of tongue contact . . . feeling that arises from the condition of body contact . . . and feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact is empty of feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact; because the perfection of giving is empty of the perfection of giving, up to the perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom; because inner emptiness is empty of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; because the applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and because, Lord, even a bodhisattva is empty of bodhisattva, and great armor is empty of great armor. I understand that bodhisattva great beings are armed with no armor, Lord, through this one of many explanations.” 
 Subhūti having spoken thus, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so. It is just as you say. And why? Because, Subhūti, the knowledge of all aspects is not made, is not unmade, and does not occasion anything, and those beings for whose sake bodhisattva great beings are armed with great armor are not made, not unmade, and do not occasion anything either.” 
 Subhūti then asked, “Why is the knowledge of all aspects not made, not unmade, and why does it not occasion anything? And why are those beings for whose sake bodhisattva great beings are armed with great armor not made, not unmade, and why do they not occasion anything?” 
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “given that you cannot apprehend a maker, the knowledge of all aspects is not made, not unmade, and does not occasion anything, and those beings for whose sake bodhisattva great beings are armed with great armor are also not made, not unmade, and do not occasion anything. And why? Because, Subhūti, form is not made, not unmade, and does not occasion anything, and those beings for whose sake bodhisattva great beings are armed with great armor are also not made, not unmade, and do not occasion anything. 
 “And why? Because, Subhūti, form does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything; the eyes do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything, and the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything; a form does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything, and a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything; the eye consciousness does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything, and the ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body  consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything; eye contact does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything, and ear contact, nose contact, tongue contact, body contact, and thinking-mind contact do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything; and feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything, and feeling that arises from the condition of ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything. Subhūti, a self does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything, and a living being, a creature, up to one who knows and one who sees does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything. And why? Because they absolutely do not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, a dream does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything, and an illusion, an echo, an apparition, a reflection in the mirror, a mirage, and a magical creation do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything. And why? Because they absolutely do not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, inner emptiness does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything. And why? Because it absolutely does not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything. And why? Because they absolutely do not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything. And why? Because they absolutely do not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended. The ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything. And why? Because they absolutely do not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended.  Subhūti, suchness does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything. And why? Because it absolutely does not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, and the very limit of reality do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything. And why? Because they absolutely do not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended. Subhūti, awakening does not make, does not unmake, and does not occasion anything. All-knowledge, the knowledge of paths, and the knowledge of all aspects do not make, do not unmake, and do not occasion anything. And why? Because they absolutely do not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, through this one of many explanations you should understand that the knowledge of all aspects is not made, not unmade, and does not occasion anything, and those beings for whose sake bodhisattva great beings are armed with great armor are not made, not unmade, and do not occasion anything. Subhūti, it is said that bodhisattva great beings are ‘armed with great armor’ in that way.”
 “Lord,” said Subhūti, “the way I understand what you have said, Lord, is that form is not bound and is not freed, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, Lord, are not bound and are not freed.”
 Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra then said, “Venerable Subhūti, you are saying form is not bound and is not freed? You are saying feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not bound and are not freed?”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Pūrṇa,  exactly so, Venerable Pūrṇa,” replied Subhūti. “Form, Venerable Pūrṇa, is not bound and is not freed; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not bound and are not freed.”
 Pūrṇa then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what is form that is not bound and is not freed? What is feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness that are not bound and are not freed?”
 “Venerable Pūrṇa,” replied Subhūti, “dream-like form is not bound and is not freed; dream-like feeling, perception, volitional factors, and dream-like consciousness are not bound and are not freed. Similarly, form that is like an echo, like an illusion, like a mirage, like an apparition, like a reflection in the mirror, and like a magical creation is not bound and is not freed; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness . . . that are like a magical creation are not bound and are not freed. 
 “Venerable Pūrṇa, past form is not bound and is not freed. Venerable Pūrṇa, past feeling, perception, volitional factors, and past consciousness are not bound and are not freed. Similarly, Venerable Pūrṇa, future form is not bound and is not freed. Venerable Pūrṇa, future feeling, perception, volitional factors, and future consciousness are not bound and are not freed. Venerable Pūrṇa, present form is not bound and is not freed. Venerable Pūrṇa, present feeling, perception, volitional factors, and present consciousness are not bound and are not freed. 
 “And why? Because form does not exist,form is not bound and is not freed. Because feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness does not exist,  consciousness is not bound and is not freed. Similarly, it is because form . . . feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is isolated, calm, empty, signless, wishless, does not occasion anything, and is not produced that consciousness is not bound and is not freed. Venerable Pūrṇa, a form that is wholesome, unwholesome, with afflictions, without afflictions, with basic immorality, without basic immorality, with outflows, without outflows, ordinary, extraordinary, defiled, and purified is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because form does not exist. That is why form is not bound and is not freed. Similarly, Venerable Pūrṇa, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness that is wholesome or unwholesome, up to purified is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because consciousness does not exist. That is why consciousness is not bound and is not freed.
 “Venerable Pūrṇa, all dharmas are not bound and are not freed. And why? Because all dharmas do not exist. That is why they are not bound and are not freed. Similarly, because they are isolated and so on, they are not bound and are not freed.
 “Venerable Pūrṇa, the perfection of giving is not bound and is not freed. Similarly, the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is not bound and is not freed—because it does not exist it is not bound and is not freed; because it is isolated and so on it is not bound and is not freed.
 “Venerable Pūrṇa, inner emptiness is also not bound and is not freed. Venerable Pūrṇa, up to emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is also not bound and is not freed.  Venerable Pūrṇa, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are also not bound and are not freed. Venerable Pūrṇa, the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are also not bound and are not freed—because they do not exist they are not bound and are not freed, because they are isolated and so on they are not bound and are not freed.
 “Venerable Pūrṇa, awakening is also not bound and is not freed, the knowledge of all aspects is also not bound and is not freed, and a bodhisattva is also not bound and is not freed—because they do not exist they are not bound and are not freed, because they are isolated they are not bound and are not freed, and because they are not produced they are not bound and are not freed.
 “Venerable Pūrṇa, suchness is also not bound and is not freed. Venerable Pūrṇa, unmistaken suchness . . . , unaltered suchness . . . , the true nature of dharmas . . . , the dharma-constituent . . . , the establishment of dharmas . . . , the certification of dharmas . . . , and the very limit of reality is also not bound and is not freed—because it does not exist and is isolated it is not bound and is not freed, because it is not produced it is not bound and is not freed. 
 “In that way, Venerable Pūrṇa, bodhisattva great beings are not bound and are not freed. In that way the six perfections are also not bound and are not freed, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not bound and is not freed. Those beings they will lead to nirvāṇa are also not bound and are not freed, those buddhafields that they will purify are also not bound and are not freed, those lord buddhas on whom they will attend are also not bound and are not freed, the Dharma they will hear is also not bound and is not freed, the lord buddhas from whom they will never again be separated are also not bound and are not freed, and the clairvoyances from which they will not be separated,  the five eyes from which they will not be separated, and the meditative stabilizations from which they will not be separated are also not bound and are not freed. The knowledge of path aspects they will produce is not bound and is not freed, the knowledge of all aspects they will awaken to is not bound and is not freed, the wheel of Dharma they will turn is not bound and is not freed, and the beings they will lead to nirvāṇa in the three vehicles are not bound and are not freed. 
 “Thus indeed, Venerable Pūrṇa, will bodhisattva great beings who are not bound and are not freed awaken in the six perfections to all dharmas, given that they do not exist, are isolated, and are not produced.”
This was the fourteenth chapter, “Neither Bound nor Freed,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 15: Meditative Stabilization
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, what is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings? Lord, to just what extent should bodhisattva great beings be known to have set out in the Great Vehicle? Where will the Great Vehicle have set out? Where will the Great Vehicle stand? Who will go forth in the Great Vehicle?”
 Subhūti having said asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘Lord, what is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings?—Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the six perfections. And what are the six? They are the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance,  perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom.
 “What is the perfection of giving? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with the thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects cause the giving of inner and outer things as gifts, and, having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, by way of not apprehending anything grow them into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of giving.”
 “Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of morality?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord said, “Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with the thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending anything personally take up and pursue the ten wholesome actions and cause other beings as well to take up the ten wholesome actions, to enter into and be established in them. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ untarnished perfection of morality.”
 “Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of patience?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord said, “Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with the thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects, personally in possession of complete patience, cause others as well to be patient, and that by way of not apprehending anything. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of patience.”
 “Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’  perfection of perseverance?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord said, “Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with the thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects do not personally forsake persevering in the five perfections, and cause others as well to persevere in the five perfections, and that by way of not apprehending anything. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of perseverance.”
 “Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of concentration?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord said, “Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with the thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects, with skillful means personally become absorbed in concentration, and, without taking birth through its power, cause others to take up concentration as well, and that by way of not apprehending anything. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of concentration.”
 “Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom?”
 The Lord said, “Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with the thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending anything personally do not settle down on all dharmas, and they analytically understand the nature of all dharmas. They also cause others as well not to settle down on all dharmas, and to analytically understand the nature all dharmas. That is the bodhisattva  great beings’ perfection of wisdom. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, great emptiness, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of the compounded, the emptiness of the uncompounded, the emptiness of what transcends limits, the emptiness of no beginning and no end, the emptiness of nonrepudiation, the emptiness of a basic nature, the emptiness of all dharmas, the emptiness of its own mark, the emptiness of not apprehending, the emptiness of a nonexistent thing, the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. 
 “What is inner emptiness? It is the emptiness of inner dharmas: the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind. There, eyes are empty of eyes because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature. Ears are empty of ears because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature. The nose is empty of the nose because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature. The tongue is empty of the tongue because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature. The body is empty of the body because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature. The thinking mind is empty of the thinking mind because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why?  Because that is its basic nature. 
 “What is outer emptiness? It is the emptiness of outer dharmas: a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma. There, a form is empty of a form because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature. Similarly, a sound . . . a smell . . . a taste . . . a feeling . . . and a dharma is empty of a dharma because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called outer emptiness.
 “What is inner and outer emptiness? The six outer sense fields and the six inner sense fields are the outer and inner dharmas. 
 “What are inner dharmas empty of outer dharmas? The inner eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are empty of an outer form, sound, smell, taste, feeling, and dharma because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature. Outer forms, sounds, smells, tastes, feelings, and dharmas are empty of the inner eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature.
 “That is called inner and outer emptiness.
 “What is the emptiness of emptiness? The emptiness of that emptiness that is the emptiness of all dharmas is empty, because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of emptiness.
 “What is great emptiness?  The eastern direction is empty of the eastern direction, the southern direction empty of the southern direction, the western direction empty of the western direction, and the northern direction empty of the northern direction because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. The above direction is empty of the above direction, and the below direction is empty of the below direction. Similarly, the intermediate directions are empty of the intermediate directions. And why? Because that is their basic nature.
 “That is called great emptiness.
 “What is the emptiness of ultimate reality? Ultimate reality is said to be nirvāṇa. Nirvāṇa is also empty of nirvāṇa because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of ultimate reality.
 “What is the emptiness of the compounded? There the compounded is said to be the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm. The desire realm is empty of the desire realm, the form realm is empty of the form realm, and the formless realm is empty of the formless because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of the compounded.
 “What is the emptiness of the uncompounded? There the uncompounded is said to be what has no production, no stopping, no destruction, no lasting, and no changing into something else. The uncompounded is empty of the uncompounded because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of the uncompounded.
 “What is the emptiness of what transcends limits? That of which a limit is not found transcends limits. Because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed, what transcends limits is empty of what transcends limits.  And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of what transcends limits.
 “What is the emptiness of no beginning and no end? That of which a beginning and an end are not found has no middle. That of which there is no beginning, end, or middle has no coming or going. A beginning, middle, and end are empty of a beginning, middle, and end because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of no beginning and no end.
 “What is the emptiness of nonrepudiation? It is the nonrejection of any dharma at all. Nonrepudiation is empty of nonrepudiation because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of nonrepudiation.
 “What is the emptiness of a basic nature? The basic nature of all dharmas, be they compounded or uncompounded, is not made by śrāvakas, is not made by pratyekabuddhas, is not made by bodhisattvas, and is not made by tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. A basic nature is empty of a basic nature because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of a basic nature.
 “What is the emptiness of all dharmas? All dharmas are said to be form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind; a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma; eye consciousness, ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness; eye  contact and ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact; feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact and feeling that arises from the condition of ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact; and dharmas that have form, formless dharmas, compounded dharmas, and uncompounded dharmas. Those are said to be all dharmas. All dharmas are empty of all dharmas because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of all dharmas.
 “What is the emptiness of its own mark? The mark of form is something that shows itself, the mark of feeling is experience, the mark of perception is taking up, the mark of volitional factors is occasioning something, and the mark of consciousness is making conscious. Whatever the marks of compounded dharmas and whatever the marks of uncompounded dharmas, all those dharmas are each empty of their own marks because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of its own mark.
 “What is the emptiness of not apprehending? Any past, future, or present dharma cannot be apprehended. Pasts cannot be apprehended in a future, and futures cannot be apprehended in a past. Presents cannot be apprehended in a past and future. Not apprehending is empty of not apprehending because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of not apprehending.
 “What is the emptiness of a nonexistent thing? It is that in which nothing can be apprehended.  The nonexistent thing is empty of the nonexistent thing because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of a nonexistent thing.
 “What is the emptiness of an intrinsic nature? It is that in which no intrinsic nature can be apprehended. An intrinsic nature is empty of an intrinsic nature because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness of an intrinsic nature.
 “What is the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature? The intrinsic nature of a phenomenon that has arisen from a union does not exist, because phenomena have originated dependently. A union is empty of a union because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature.
 “That is called the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, in regard to what is called the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, an existent thing is empty of an existent thing, a nonexistent thing is empty of a nonexistent thing, intrinsic nature is empty of intrinsic nature, and a nature from something else is empty of a nature from something else.
 “What is an existent thing? That which is called an existent thing is the five aggregates. There you cannot apprehend those five aggregates, because they have not been produced. Hence an existent thing is empty of an existent thing.
 “Why is a nonexistent thing also empty of a nonexistent thing? That which is called a nonexistent thing is the uncompounded. There the uncompounded is also empty of the uncompounded, so a nonexistent thing is also empty of a nonexistent thing.
 “Why is intrinsic nature also empty of intrinsic nature? Intrinsic nature is unmistaken, basic nature. There that emptiness has not been made by knowledge and has not been made by seeing, hence the emptiness of an intrinsic nature.
 “What is the emptiness of a nature from something else? It is this establishment of dharmas that simply remains whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma  constituent, the certification of dharmas, suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, and the very limit of reality. Thus, that which is empty of something else is the emptiness of a nature from something else.
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the meditative stabilization śūraṅgama, the meditative stabilization ratnamudra, the meditative stabilization siṃhavikrīḍita, the meditative stabilization sucandra, the meditative stabilization candra­dhvaja­ketu, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharmodgata, the meditative stabilization vilokita­mūrdhā, the meditative stabilization dharma­dhātu­niyata, the meditative stabilization niyata­dhvaja­ketu, the meditative stabilization vajraratna, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­praveśa­mudra, the meditative stabilization samādhi­rāja­su­pratiṣṭhita, the meditative stabilization raśmipramukha, the meditative stabilization balavyūha, the meditative stabilization samudgata, the meditative stabilization nirukti­nirdeśa­praveśa, the meditative stabilization adhivacana­saṃpraveśa, the meditative stabilization digvilokita, the meditative stabilization ādhāramudrā, the meditative stabilization asaṃpramoṣa, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­samavasaraṇa­sāgara­mudra, the meditative stabilization ākāśaspharaṇa, the meditative stabilization vajramaṇḍala, the meditative stabilization ratnajahā, the meditative stabilization vairocana,  the meditative stabilization aneṣa, the meditative stabilization aniketasthita, the meditative stabilization niścitta, the meditative stabilization vimalapradīpa, the meditative stabilization anantaprabha, the meditative stabilization prabhākara, the meditative stabilization samantāvabhāsa, the meditative stabilization śuddhasāra, the meditative stabilization vimalaprabha, the meditative stabilization ratikara, the meditative stabilization vidyutpradīpa, the meditative stabilization akṣaya, the meditative stabilization tejovatin, the meditative stabilization kṣayāpagata, the meditative stabilization āniñjya, the meditative stabilization avivartta, the meditative stabilization sūryapradīpa, the meditative stabilization candravimala, the meditative stabilization śuddha­pratibhāsa, the meditative stabilization ālokakara, the meditative stabilization kārākāra, the meditative stabilization jñānaketu, the meditative stabilization vajropama, the meditative stabilization cittasthiti, the meditative stabilization samantāvaloka, the meditative stabilization supratiṣṭhita, the meditative stabilization ratnakoṭi, the meditative stabilization vara­dharma­mudra, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­samatā, the meditative stabilization ratijaha, the meditative stabilization dharma­samudgata­pūrṇa, the meditative stabilization vikiraṇa, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharma­pada­prabheda, the meditative stabilization samākṣarāvakāra, the meditative stabilization akṣarāpagata, the meditative stabilization ārambanacchedaḥ, the meditative stabilization avikāra,  the meditative stabilization aprakāra, the meditative stabilization nāma­niyata­praveśa, the meditative stabilization aniketacārī, the meditative stabilization vitimirāpagata, the meditative stabilization cāritravatin, the meditative stabilization acala, the meditative stabilization viṣayatīrṇa, the meditative stabilization sarva­guṇa­saṃcaya, the meditative stabilization sthitaniścitta, the meditative stabilization śubha­puṣpita­śuddhi, the meditative stabilization bodhyaṅgavatin, the meditative stabilization ananta­pratibhāna, the meditative stabilization asamasama, the meditative stabilization sarva­dharmātikramaṇa, the meditative stabilization paricchedakara, the meditative stabilization vimativikaraṇa, the meditative stabilization niradhiṣṭhāna, the meditative stabilization ekavyūha, the meditative stabilization ākārābhinirhāra, the meditative stabilization ekākāra, the meditative stabilization ākārānavakāra, the meditative stabilization nairvedhika­sarva­bhava­tamo’pagata, the meditative stabilization sarva­saṃketa­rūta­praveśa, the meditative stabilization sarva­giri­ghoṣākṣara­vimukta, the meditative stabilization jvalanolka, the meditative stabilization lakṣana­pariśodhaṇa, the meditative stabilization anabhilakṣita, the meditative stabilization sarvākāra­varopeta, the meditative stabilization sarva­sukha­duḥkha­nirabhinandin, the meditative stabilization akṣayakaraṇḍa, the meditative stabilization dhāraṇīmati, the meditative stabilization samyaktva­mithyātva­sarva­saṃgrasana,  the meditative stabilization sarva­rodha­nirodha­saṃpraśamana, the meditative stabilization anurodhāprati­rodha, the meditative stabilization vimalaprabha, the meditative stabilization sāravatin, the meditative stabilization paripūrṇa­vimala­candra­prabha, the meditative stabilization vidyutprabha, the meditative stabilization mahāvyūha, the meditative stabilization sarvākāra­prabhākara, the meditative stabilization samādhisamata, the meditative stabilization araṇa­samavasaraṇa, the meditative stabilization araṇa­saraṇa­sarva­samavasaraṇa, the meditative stabilization anilambha­niketa­nirata, the meditative stabilization tathatā­sthiti­niścitta, the meditative stabilization kāya­kali­saṃpramathana, the meditative stabilization vākkali­vidhvaṃsana­gagana­kalpa, and the meditative stabilization ākāśāsaṃga­vimukti­nirupalepa.
 “What is the śūraṅgama meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization that causes an experience of the range of all meditative stabilizations is called the śūraṅgama meditative stabilization.
 “What is the ratnamudra meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization sealed by all meditative stabilizations is called the ratnamudra meditative stabilization.
 “What is the siṃhavikrīḍita meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which bodhisattvas sport with all meditative stabilizations is called the siṃhavikrīḍita meditative stabilization.
 “What is the sucandra meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they illuminate all meditative stabilizations is called the sucandra meditative stabilization.
 “What  is the candra­dhvaja­ketu meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they bear the royal ensign of all meditative stabilizations is called the candra­dhvaja­ketu meditative stabilization.
 “What is the sarva­dharmodgata meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they distinguish themselves with all meditative stabilizations is called the sarva­dharmodgata meditative stabilization.
 “What is the vilokita­mūrdhā meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they look down on the peaks of all meditative stabilizations is called the vilokita­mūrdhā meditative stabilization.
 “What is the dharma­dhātu­niyata meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they move toward certainty about the dharma-constituent is called the dharma­dhātu­niyata meditative stabilization.
 “What is the niyata­dhvaja­ketu meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they bear the royal ensign of those assured of all meditative stabilizations is called the niyata­dhvaja­ketu meditative stabilization.
 “What is the vajraratna meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which meditative stabilizations are not broken apart is called the vajraratna meditative stabilization.
 “What is the sarva­dharma­praveśa­mudra meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they enter into the seal of all dharmas is called the sarva­dharma­praveśa­mudra meditative stabilization.
 “What is the samādhi­rāja­su­pratiṣṭhita meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they stand with a king-like stance in all meditative stabilizations is called the samādhi­rāja­su­pratiṣṭhita meditative stabilization.
 “What is the raśmipramukha meditative stabilization?  The meditative stabilization standing in which they emit the light rays of all meditative stabilizations is called the raśmipramukha meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the balavyūha meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they set out an array of the powers of all meditative stabilizations is called the balavyūha meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the samudgata meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they perfectly accomplish all meditative stabilizations is called the samudgata meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the nirukti­nirdeśa­praveśa meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they enter into expositions of the creative explanations of all meditative stabilizations is called the nirukti­nirdeśa­praveśa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the adhivacana­saṃpraveśa meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they enter into the names and words for all meditative stabilizations is called the adhivacana­saṃpraveśa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the digvilokita meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they see the directions of all meditative stabilizations is called the digvilokita meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ādhāramudrā meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they hold the seals of all meditative stabilizations is called the ādhāramudrā meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the asaṃpramoṣa meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they do not forget any meditative stabilization is called the asaṃpramoṣa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarva­dharma­samavasaraṇa­sāgara­mudra meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which all meditative stabilizations  are collected and into which they flow down is called the sarva­dharma­samavasaraṇa­sāgara­mudra meditative stabilization.
 “What is the ākāśaspharaṇa meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they pervade all meditative stabilizations by pervading like space is called the ākāśaspharaṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the vajramaṇḍala meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they bear in mind the maṇḍalas of all meditative stabilizations is called the vajramaṇḍala meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ratnajahā meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which it would be enough that they forsake the causal signs for afflictions, but they also forsake the causal signs of all meditative stabilizations as well. Therefore it is called the ratnajahā meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the vairocana meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they illuminate, irradiate, and light up all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the vairocana meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the aneṣa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not seek any dharma. Therefore it is called the aneṣa meditative stabilization.
 “What is the aniketasthita meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see any dharma as a dwelling place to stand on. Therefore it is called the aniketasthita meditative stabilization.
 “What is the niścitta meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which minds and mental factors do not operate. Therefore it is called the niścitta meditative stabilization.
 “What is the vimalapradīpa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they are a stainless lamp for all meditative stabilizations. Therefore  it is called the vimalapradīpa meditative stabilization.
 “What is the anantaprabha meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they are an infinite light for all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the anantaprabha meditative stabilization.
 “What is the prabhākara meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they make light for all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the prabhākara meditative stabilization.
 “What is the samantāvabhāsa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization that illuminates the entrances to all meditative stabilizations as soon as it is gained. Therefore it is called the samantāvabhāsa meditative stabilization.
 “What is the śuddhasāra meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they gain the purity that is the same for all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the śuddhasāra meditative stabilization.
 “What is the vimalaprabha meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they clear away the stains of all meditative stabilizations and illuminate all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the vimalaprabha meditative stabilization.
 “What is the ratikara meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which causes an experience of the pleasure of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the ratikara meditative stabilization.
 “What is the vidyutpradīpa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they act as a lamp to all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the vidyutpradīpa meditative stabilization.
 “What is the akṣaya meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see the extinction or nonextinction of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the akṣaya meditative stabilization.
 “What is the tejovatin meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they blaze with the splendor  and glory of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the tejovatin meditative stabilization.
 “What is the kṣayāpagata meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see the extinction of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the kṣayāpagata meditative stabilization.
 “What is the āniñjya meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not move, do not shake, do not falsely project, and do not construct any meditative stabilizations in thought. Therefore it is called the āniñjya meditative stabilization.
 “What is the avivartta meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see a turning in any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the avivartta meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sūryapradīpa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they illuminate the entrance of the light rays of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the sūryapradīpa meditative stabilization.
 “What is the candravimala meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they lift the darkness of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the candravimala meditative stabilization.
 “What is the śuddha­pratibhāsa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they obtain the four detailed and thorough knowledges of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the śuddha­pratibhāsa meditative stabilization.
 “What is the ālokakara meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they illuminate all meditative stabilization gateways. Therefore it is called the ālokakara meditative stabilization.
 “What is the kārākāra meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do the forms of work of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore  it is called the kārākāra meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the jñānaketu meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they see the knowledge victory banner of all meditative stabilizations is called the jñānaketu meditative stabilization.
 “What is the vajropama meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they bore into all dharmas so that they do not see even the meditative stabilization is called the vajropama meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the cittasthiti meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which their mind does not move, does not turn back, does not believe, does not get depressed, and does not think ‘this is mind.’ Therefore it is called the cittasthiti meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the samantāvaloka meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they see illumination all around. Therefore it is called the samantāvaloka meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the supratiṣṭhita meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they are well established in all meditative stabilizations is called the supratiṣṭhita meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ratnakoṭi meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which all meditative stabilizations look like they are edged with jewels. Therefore it is called the ratnakoṭi meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the vara­dharma­mudra meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which all meditative stabilizations are sealed because they are sealed at their edges with the absence of a seal. Therefore it is called the vara­dharma­mudra meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarva­dharma­samatā meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they see, apart from sameness, no dharma at all.  Therefore it is called the sarva­dharma­samatā meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ratijaha meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they forsake the pleasure of all meditative stabilizations and all dharmas. Therefore it is called the ratijaha meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the dharma­samudgata­pūrṇa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they become distinguished by all dharmas and complete all buddhadharmas. Therefore it is called the dharma­samudgata­pūrṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the vikiraṇa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they strew all dharmas about with all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the vikiraṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarva­dharma­pada­prabheda meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they differentiate the words for all meditative stabilizations and all dharmas. Therefore it is called the sarva­dharma­pada­prabheda meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the samākṣarāvakāra meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they reach the state where the letters for all meditative stabilizations are the same is called the samākṣarāvakāra meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the akṣarāpagata meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which one does not find even one letter for all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the akṣarāpagata meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ārambanacchedaḥ meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they cut off the objective support for all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the ārambanacchedaḥ meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the avikāra meditative stabilization?  It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not find a distortion of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the avikāra meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the aprakāra meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not find an aspect of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the aprakāra meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the aniketacārī meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not find a dwelling for all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the aniketacārī meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the vitimirāpagata meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they eliminate the visual distortion of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the vitimirāpagata meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the cāritravatin meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they see the activity of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the cāritravatin meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the acala meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see movement in any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the acala meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the viṣayatīrṇa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they transcend the object of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the viṣayatīrṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarva­guṇa­saṃcaya meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they gain the collection of good qualities of all dharmas and of all meditative stabilizations is called the sarva­guṇa­saṃcaya meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sthitaniścitta meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which the mind  does not operate in any meditative stabilization is called the sthitaniścitta meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the śubha­puṣpita­śuddhi meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they gain the purity of the blooming flower of goodness is called the śubha­puṣpita­śuddhi meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the bodhyaṅgavatin meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they gain the seven limbs of awakening is called the bodhyaṅgavatin meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ananta­pratibhāna meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they gain a limitless confident readiness to explain all meditative stabilizations is called the ananta­pratibhāna meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the asamasama meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they gain the equal to the unequaled in all meditative stabilizations is called the asamasama meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarva­dharmātikramaṇa meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they go beyond all three realms is called the sarva­dharmātikramaṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the paricchedakara meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which the delimitation of all dharmas and all meditative stabilizations is seen is called the paricchedakara meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the vimativikaraṇa meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they get to disperse doubt about all phenomena and all meditative stabilizations is called the vimativikaraṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the niradhiṣṭhāna meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which  they do not see a basis for all phenomena is called the niradhiṣṭhāna meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ekavyūha meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see a duality in any phenomenon is called the ekavyūha meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ākārābhinirhāra meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see the consummation of the aspect of any dharma or any meditative stabilization is called the ākārābhinirhāra meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ekākāra meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see an aspect of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the ekākāra meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the ākārānavakāra meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they see the nonduality of all meditative stabilizations is called the ākārānavakāra meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the nairvedhika­sarva­bhava­tamo’pagata meditative stabilization? The meditative stabilization standing in which they obtain knowledge that realizes all meditative stabilizations, even while those obtaining it do not specifically realize any dharma is called the nairvedhika­sarva­bhava­tamo’pagata meditative stabilization.
 “What is the sarva­saṃketa­rūta­praveśa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they enter into the conventional terms and sounds for all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the sarva­saṃketa­rūta­praveśa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarva­giri­ghoṣākṣara­vimukta meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they see all meditative stabilizations  as free from letters. Therefore it is called the sarva­giri­ghoṣākṣara­vimukta meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the jvalanolka meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they illuminate, irradiate, and light up all meditative stabilizations with splendor. Therefore it is called the jvalanolka meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the lakṣana­pariśodhaṇa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they purify the marks of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the lakṣana­pariśodhaṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the anabhilakṣita meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they see all meditative stabilizations without their being distinguished. Therefore it is called the anabhilakṣita meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarvākāra­varopeta meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which all meditative stabilizations become furnished with the supreme of all aspects. Therefore it is called the sarvākāra­varopeta meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarva­sukha­duḥkha­nirabhinandin meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see happiness or suffering. Therefore it is called the sarva­sukha­duḥkha­nirabhinandin meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the akṣayakaraṇḍa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see the extinction of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the akṣayakaraṇḍa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the dhāraṇīmati meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they bear in mind all dhāraṇīs. Therefore it is called the dhāraṇīmati meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the samyaktva­mithyātva­sarva­saṃgrasana meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see a right or wrong of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the samyaktva­mithyātva­sarva­saṃgrasana meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarva­rodha­nirodha­saṃpraśamana meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see the prevention or stopping of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the sarva­rodha­nirodha­saṃpraśamana meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the anurodhāprati­rodha meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see the harmony or nonopposition of any dharma or any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the anurodhāprati­rodha meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the vimalaprabha meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not apprehend the light circle of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the vimalaprabha meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sāravatin meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not apprehend the absence of a core of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the sāravatin meditative stabilization.
 “What is the paripūrṇa­vimala­candra­prabha meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which all meditative stabilizations are completed, like the full moon. Therefore it is called the paripūrṇa­vimala­candra­prabha meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the mahāvyūha meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they are endowed with the great array  of all meditative stabilizations. Therefore it is called the mahāvyūha meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the sarvākāra­prabhākara meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they make the light of all meditative stabilizations and all dharmas. Therefore it is called the sarvākāra­prabhākara meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the samādhisamata meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see distraction or onepointedness. Therefore it is called the samādhisamata meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the araṇa­samavasaraṇa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which the meditative stabilizations do not afflict. Therefore it is called the araṇa­samavasaraṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the araṇa­saraṇa­sarva­samavasaraṇa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which the meditative stabilizations do not emit any noise. Therefore it is called the araṇa­saraṇa­sarva­samavasaraṇa meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the anilambha­niketa­nirata meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not apprehend a foundation of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the anilambha­niketa­nirata meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the tathatā­sthiti­niścitta meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not regress from the suchness of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the tathatā­sthiti­niścitta meditative stabilization.
 “What is the kāya­kali­saṃpramathana meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not see the body of any meditative stabilization. Therefore  it is called the kāya­kali­saṃpramathana meditative stabilization.
 “What is the vākkali­vidhvaṃsana­gagana­kalpa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they do not apprehend the speech action of any meditative stabilization. Therefore it is called the vākkali­vidhvaṃsana­gagana­kalpa meditative stabilization.
 “What is the ākāśāsaṃga­vimukti­nirupalepa meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which they reach all phenomena as space-like and without attachment, hence free and without blemish. Therefore it is called the ākāśāsaṃga­vimukti­nirupalepa meditative stabilization.
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom.” 
This was the fifteenth chapter, “Meditative Stabilization,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 16: Dhāraṇī Gateway
“Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four applications of mindfulness. What are the four? They are the application of mindfulness to the body, the application of mindfulness to feeling, the application of mindfulness to mind, and the application of mindfulness to dharmas. 
 “What is the application of mindfulness to the body? Here enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the inner body by way of not apprehending anything, and without indulging in speculations to do with the body. They dwell while viewing in a body the outer body, and they dwell while viewing in a body  the inner and outer body by way of not apprehending anything, and without indulging in speculations to do with the body.
 “Enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in dharmas inner feelings, mind, and inner dharmas, by way of not apprehending anything, and without indulging in speculations to do with dharmas. They dwell while viewing in dharmas outer feelings, mind, and outer dharmas, and dwell while viewing in dharmas inner and outer feelings, mind, and inner and outer dharmas by way of not apprehending anything, and without indulging in speculations to do with the body.
 “And how, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings dwell while viewing in a body the inner body? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings dwell, while viewing in a body the inner body, aware when practicing, ‘I am practicing’; aware when they have stood, ‘I am standing’; aware when they have sat down, ‘I am sitting’; aware when they have laid down, ‘I am lying down.’ Whatever the position their body is in, they are aware of what it is. Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the inner body like that. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who dwell while viewing in a body the inner body, while going out or coming back, are those who are clearly conscious of what they are doing. When they have looked around or peered, they are clearly conscious of what they are doing. When they have pulled in;  stretched out; are wearing an under robe, carrying a begging bowl, or wearing an outer robe; or have eaten, drunk, chewed, savored, warded off being overcome by drowsiness, come, gone, stood, sat down, slept, awoken, spoken, remained silent, or withdrawn for meditation, they are those who are clearly conscious of what they are doing. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom dwell while viewing in a body the inner body by way of not apprehending anything like that. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings are mindful when breathing in, aware of the fact ‘I am breathing in’; are mindful when breathing out, aware of the fact ‘I am breathing out’; when breathing in long, are aware of the fact ‘I am breathing in long’; when breathing out long, are aware of the fact ‘I am breathing out long’; when breathing in short, are aware of the fact ‘I am breathing in short’; and when breathing out short, are aware of the fact ‘I am breathing out short.’ 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, when a skillful potter or potter’s apprentice turns the wheel they are aware when they give it a long spin, ‘I am giving it a long spin,’ and they are aware when they give it a short spin, ‘I am giving it a short spin.’ Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings when mindfully breathing in are mindfully aware of the fact ‘I am breathing in’; when mindfully breathing out are mindfully aware of the fact ‘I am breathing out’; when breathing in longare aware of the fact ‘I am breathing in long’;  when breathing out long are aware of the fact ‘I am breathing out long’; when breathing in short are aware of the fact ‘I am breathing in short’; and when breathing out short are aware of the fact ‘I am breathing out short.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell viewing in a body the inner body like that, and that by way of not apprehending anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom examine how this very body in fact has constituents, how in this body are the earth element, water element, fire element, and wind element. As an example, Subhūti, when a skillful butcher of cows or apprentice to a butcher of cows has killed a cow with a sharp knife and quartered it, they examine it while standing or sitting. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom also examine how this very body in fact has constituents, how in this body are the earth element, water element, fire element, and wind element. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom dwell viewing in a body the inner body like that while standing or sitting, and that by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom examine properly how this very body is full of various types of filth from the soles of the feet on up, from the top of the head on down, and out as far as the nails, hairs, and skin. They examine on this body  the hair on the head and hairs on the body, the nails, the teeth, the covering of skin, and the flesh, sinew, blood, bone, marrow, heart, kidney, liver, lungs, spleen, gut, intestines, coiled intestines, colon, urine, excrement, tears, sweat, fat, snot, mucus, pus, bile, phlegm, oil, marrow, plasma, dirt, cranium, brain, discharge from the eyes, and ear wax. As an analogy, Subhūti, when those with eyes untie and inspect a farmer’s sack full of different types of unhusked rice, unhusked grains, sesame seeds, husked grains, mung beans, kidney beans, lentils, barley, wheat, and mustard seeds, they know ‘this is unhusked rice, these are unhusked grains, these are sesame seeds, these are mung beans, these are kidney beans, these are lentils, this is barley, this is wheat, and these are mustard seeds.’ Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom examine how this very body is full of various types of filth from the soles of the feet on up, from the top of the head on down, and out as far as the nails, hairs, and skin. They examine on this body the hair on the head and hairs on the body, the nails, the teeth, the covering of skin, and the flesh, sinew, blood, bone, marrow, heart, kidney, liver, lungs, spleen, gut, intestines, coiled intestines, colon, urine, excrement,  tears, sweat, fat, snot, mucus, pus, bile, phlegm, oil, marrow, plasma, dirt, cranium, brain, discharge from the eyes, and ear wax. Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell viewing while in a body the inner body like that, by way of not apprehending anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings staying in a charnel ground see various bodies thrown out in the charnel ground that have been dead for one day, dead for two days, dead for three days, dead for four days, or dead for five days, or are bloated, black and blue, rotten, or cleaned out by worms, they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too has such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the body like that. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings see human corpses thrown out in the charnel ground dead for six days or dead for seven days or lying there being eaten by crows, kites, buzzards, vultures, hawks, jackals, foxes, or dogs, or being eaten by any other of the various kinds of creatures, they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too is of such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic,  introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the outer body like that.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings see human corpses thrown out in the charnel ground that are chewed up, filthy, rotten, and stinking, they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too is of such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the body like that.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings see a complete skeleton thrown out in the charnel ground daubed with flesh and blood and hardly connected by sinews, they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too is of such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’  Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the body like that.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings see the bones of a skeleton in the charnel ground without flesh and blood, colored like a conch shell and unconnected by sinews, they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too is of such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, are those who view in a body the body like that.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings see in the charnel ground the bones no longer held in the frame of a skeleton, detached from each other, scattered about like conch shells, they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too is of such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the body like that.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings see in the charnel ground bones scattered on the ground in the main and intermediate directions—in one the bones of the feet, in another the bones of the lower leg, in another the bones of the upper leg, in another hip bones, in another rib bones, in another vertebrae, in another shoulder bones, in another neck bones, in another the skull and jaw bone—they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too is of such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the body like that.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings see in the charnel ground bones  that have been there for years bleached by the wind and the sun, colored like conch shells, they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too is of such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, dwell while viewing in a body the body like that.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings see in the charnel ground decayed bones the dark color of the wood pigeon, crumbled to bits and become like the soil of the earth, they connect this very body with that reality: ‘This body too is of such a quality, is of such a nature, and does not avoid having that as its natural state.’ Subhūti, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, are those who view in a body the inner body, are those who view in a body the outer body, and dwell as those who view in a body the inner and outer body like that.
 “Similarly, enthusiastic, introspective, mindful bodhisattva great beings, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, are those who view the dharmas of feelings, minds, and dharmas.
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four right efforts. What are the four? Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings generate the desire not to produce wrong unwholesome dharmas not yet produced, making an effort at it, making a vigorous attempt,  tightening up the mind and perfectly settling it down. They generate the desire to abandon wrong unwholesome dharmas already produced, making an effort at it, making a vigorous attempt, exerting themselves mentally, and setting it out as a perfect goal. They generate the desire to produce wholesome dharmas not yet produced, making an effort at it, making a vigorous attempt, exerting themselves mentally, and setting it out as a perfect goal. They generate the desire that wholesome dharmas already produced will remain, will increase, will not be forgotten, will not degenerate, and will be completed, making an effort at it, making a vigorous attempt, tightening up the mind and perfectly settling it down by way of settling it down without apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four legs of miraculous power. What are the four? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings develop a leg of miraculous power endowed with meditative stabilization and the volitional effort to eliminate caused by yearning based on isolation, based on detachment, based on cessation, and transformed by renunciation; and they develop a leg of miraculous power endowed with meditative stabilization and the volitional effort to eliminate caused by perseverance, concentrated mind, and examination based on isolation, based on detachment, based on cessation, and transformed by renunciation, and that without apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the five faculties. What are the five? They are the faith faculty, perseverance faculty, mindfulness faculty, meditative stabilization faculty, and wisdom faculty. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the five powers. What are the five? They are the power of faith, power of perseverance, power of mindfulness, power of meditative stabilization, and power of wisdom, by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the seven limbs of awakening. What are the seven? They develop the right mindfulness limb of awakening, the right examination of dharmas limb of awakening, the right perseverance limb of awakening, the right joy limb of awakening, the right pliability limb of awakening, the right meditative stabilization limb of awakening, and the right equanimity limb of awakening, all based on detachment, based on cessation, and transformed by renunciation, and that without apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the eightfold noble path. What are the eight limbs of the noble path? They are right view, right idea, right speech, right conduct, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right meditative stabilization, by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the three meditative stabilizations that are the three gateways to liberation. What are the three? They are the emptiness meditative stabilization, the signless meditative stabilization, and the wishless meditative stabilization.
 “What is the emptiness meditative stabilization? The stability of mind that understands analytically that all dharmas are empty of their own mark is the emptiness gateway to liberation called the emptiness meditative stabilization.
 “What is the signlessness meditative stabilization? The stability of mind that understands analytically that all dharmas are without a causal sign is the signlessness gateway to liberation called the signlessness meditative stabilization.
 “What is the meditative stabilization on the wishlessness? The stability of mind that understands analytically that all dharmas do not occasion anything is the wishlessness gateway to liberation called the wishlessness meditative stabilization.
 “The meditative stabilizations that are those three gateways to liberation are the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. They should train in those three gateways to liberation.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the eleven knowledges. What are the eleven? They are knowledge of suffering, knowledge of origination, knowledge of cessation, knowledge of the path, knowledge of extinction, knowledge of nonproduction, knowledge of dharma, subsequent realization knowledge, conventional knowledge, knowledge of mastery, and knowledge in accord with sound.
 “What is knowledge of suffering? The knowledge that suffering is not produced is called knowledge of suffering. 
 “What is knowledge of origination? The knowledge of the abandonment of origination is called knowledge of origination.
 “What is knowledge of cessation?  The knowledge of the cessation of suffering is called knowledge of cessation.
 “What is knowledge of the path? The knowledge of the eightfold noble path is called knowledge of the path.
 “What is knowledge of extinction? It is the knowledge that greed, hatred, and confusion have been extinguished. 
 “What is knowledge of nonproduction? It is the knowledge that a form of life in suffering existence is not produced.
 “What is knowledge of dharma? It is knowledge that knows decisively that the aggregates are artificial.
 “What is subsequent realization knowledge? It is knowledge that the eyes and the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are impermanent. Connect this in the same way with the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields, up to all dharmas.
 “What is conventional knowledge? It is knowledge of the thoughts of other beings and other persons by the thought to know them. 
 “What is knowledge of mastery? Knowledge of the path and knowledge of extinction is called knowledge of mastery.
 “What is knowledge in accord with sound? It is a tathāgata’s knowledge of all sounds. It is knowledge, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of a bodhisattva great being is this: the three faculties. They are the faculty of coming to understand what one does not understand, the faculty of understanding, and the faculty of having understood.
 “What is the faculty of coming to understand what one does not understand? The faith faculty, perseverance faculty, mindfulness faculty, meditative stabilization faculty, and wisdom faculty without appearances that tame the arrogance  of trainee persons who have not had a clear realization is called the faculty of coming to understand what one does not understand. 
 “What is the faculty of understanding? The faith faculty, perseverance faculty, mindfulness faculty, meditative stabilization faculty, and wisdom faculty of trainees who have understood is called the faculty of understanding. 
 “What is the faculty of having understood? The faith faculty, perseverance faculty, mindfulness faculty, meditative stabilization faculty, and wisdom faculty of nontrainee persons—worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas—is called the faculty of having understood.
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the three meditative stabilizations. They are the meditative stabilization with applied thought and with sustained thought, the meditative stabilization without applied thought with only sustained thought, and the meditative stabilization without either applied or sustained thought.
 “What is the meditative stabilization with applied thought and with sustained thought? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment. That is called the meditative stabilization with applied thought and with sustained thought.
 “What is the meditative stabilization without applied thought with only sustained thought? It is between the first concentration and the second concentration. That is called the meditative stabilization without applied thought with only sustained thought.
 “What  is the meditative stabilization without either applied or sustained thought? It is from the second concentration, up to the station of the neither perception nor nonperception absorption. That is called the meditative stabilization without either applied or sustained thought.
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great being is this: the ten mindfulnesses. What are the ten? They are mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of morality, mindfulness of giving away, mindfulness of the gods, mindfulness of disgust, mindfulness of death, mindfulness of what is included in the body, and mindfulness of breathing in and out. That mindfulness, furthermore, is by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four immeasurables. What are the four? They dwell having pervaded the ten directions of a world that is vast because of the dharma-constituent and that extends as far as the space element with a vast, inclusive, infinite, nondual mind endowed with love without enmity, unrivaled, not harmful, and well cultivated.
“They dwell having pervaded the ten directions of a world as vast as the dharma-constituent and as far-reaching as the space element with a vast, inclusive, infinite, nondual mind endowed with compassion, endowed with joy, and endowed with equanimity without enmity, unrivaled, not harmful, and well cultivated. 
“That, Subhūti,  is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four concentrations. What are the four? 
 “Detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment. 
 “Relieved of applied thought and sustained thought, with an inner serene confidence and a mind that has become a single continuum, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the second concentration that has joy and happiness born of a meditative stabilization without applied thought and without sustained thought. 
 “Because they are free from attachment to joy they abide in equanimity, and with equanimity and recollection and introspection they experience pleasure with their body, and they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the third concentration without enjoyment, about which the noble beings say, ‘They have equanimity and recollection and dwell in happiness.’ 
 “Because they have forsaken pleasure, have earlier forsaken suffering, have set to rest mental happiness and mental unhappiness and have equanimity that is neither happiness nor suffering, and have an extremely pure equanimity and recollection, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the fourth concentration. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four formless absorptions. What are the four? 
 “Totally transcending perceptions of form, setting to rest perceptions of obstruction, not paying attention to perceptions of difference, in endless space they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless space. 
 “Totally transcending  the station of endless space, in endless consciousness they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless consciousness. 
 “Totally transcending the station of endless consciousness, in nothing-at-all they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of nothing-at-all. 
 “Totally transcending the station of nothing-at-all, in neither perception nor nonperception they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of neither perception nor nonperception.
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the eight deliverances. What are the eight? 
 “With form they see forms. This is the first deliverance. 
 “With the perception of form inside they see forms outside. This is the second deliverance. 
 “They have admiration for the pleasant. This is the third deliverance. 
 “Totally transcending perceptions of form, setting to rest perceptions of obstruction, not paying attention to perceptions of difference, in endless space they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless space. This is the fourth deliverance. 
 “Totally transcending the station of endless space, in endless consciousness they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless consciousness. This is the fifth deliverance. 
 “Totally transcending the station of endless consciousness, in nothing-at-all they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of nothing-at-all. This is the sixth deliverance. 
 “Totally transcending the station of nothing-at-all, in neither perception nor nonperception they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. This is the seventh deliverance. 
 “Totally transcending  the station of neither perception nor nonperception they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the cessation of perception and feeling. This is the eighth deliverance.
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the nine serial absorptions. What are the nine? 
 “Detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment.
 “Relieved of applied thought and sustained thought, with an inner serene confidence and a mind that has become a single continuum, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the second concentration that has joy and happiness born of a meditative stabilization without applied thought and without sustained thought. 
 “Because they are free from attachment to joy they abide in equanimity, and with equanimity and recollection and introspection they experience happiness with their bodies, and they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the third concentration without joy, about which the noble beings say, ‘They have equanimity and recollection and dwell in happiness.’ 
 “Because they have forsaken happiness, have earlier forsaken suffering, have set to rest mental happiness and mental unhappiness and have pure equanimity that is neither happiness nor suffering, and have recollection, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the fourth concentration. 
 “Totally transcending perceptions of form, setting to rest perceptions of obstruction, not paying attention to perceptions of difference, thinking ‘it is endless space’ they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless space. 
 “Totally transcending the station of endless space,  thinking ‘it is endless consciousness’ they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless consciousness. 
 “Totally transcending the station of endless consciousness, in nothing-at-all they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of nothing-at-all. 
 “Totally transcending the station of nothing-at-all, in neither perception nor nonperception they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. 
 “Totally transcending the station of neither perception nor nonperception they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the cessation of perception and feeling. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the ten powers of a tathāgata. What are the ten? 
 “Accurately knowing the possible as possible, and accurately knowing the impossible as impossible.
 “Accurately knowing past, present, and future actions, and the place of the undertaking of the actions, and the results.
 “Accurately knowing the world with its various constituents and multiplicity of constituents.
 “Accurately knowing the various beliefs and many beliefs of other beings and other persons.
 “Accurately knowing the stages of faculties and perseverance of other beings and other persons.
 “Accurately knowing the path wherever it goes.
 “Accurately knowing the defilement and purification of all concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions, and the emergence from them. 
 “Accurately recollecting and knowing many various previous lives and knowing deaths and rebirths with the divine eye.
 “Perfectly accomplishing and dwelling in a freedom in their minds that they have realized themselves in this very life with clairvoyance, a freedom and wisdom without outflows because of having put an end to outflows. They know, ‘Birth has come to an end for me. I have lived the pure life. My work is done. From now on there will be nothing like this.’ And that, furthermore, is by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four fearlessnesses. What are the four? 
 “When I claim, ‘I am perfectly completely awakened,’ ah! I see no cause that would make me think that anyone in this world of beings, together with the gods, Māra, Brahmā, those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins, could in truth argue there that these dharmas have not become perfectly, completely awakened. Because I do not see here that cause, I, who have found happiness, found fearlessness, and found a ground for self-confidence, claim the exalted status of the dominant bull. I roar the lion’s perfect roar in the assembly. I, Brahmā-like, turn the wheel that no one in this world—not a god or Māra or Brahmā or one leading a secluded religious life or a brahmin—can in truth turn. 
 “When I claim, ‘I have put an end to outflows,’ ah! I see there no cause that would make me think that anyone in this world of beings, together with the gods, Māra, Brahmā, those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins, could in truth argue,  ‘You have not put an end to those outflows.’ Because I do not see that cause here I have found happiness, found fearlessness, and found a ground for self-confidence, and I claim the exalted status of the dominant bull. I roar the lion’s perfect roar in the assembly. I, Brahmā-like, turn the wheel that no one in this world—not a god or Māra or Brahmā or one leading a secluded religious life or a brahmin—can in truth turn. 
 “There are no grounds for those phenomena that I have explained to be hindrances not to become phenomena that hinder those who resort to them, so I see no cause that would make me think that anyone in this world of beings, together with the gods, Māra, Brahmā, those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins, could in truth argue that even if they resort to them they do not become hindrances. Because I do not see any cause here, I have found happiness, found fearlessness, found a ground for self-confidence, and claim as my state the exalted state of the dominant bull. I roar the lion’s perfect roar in the assembly. I, Brahmā-like, turn the wheel that no one in this world—not a god or Māra or Brahmā or one leading a secluded religious life or a brahmin—can in truth turn. 
 “There are no grounds for saying that the noble paths that I have said cause escape do not perfectly put an end to suffering when those escapes that perfectly put an end to the suffering of those who effect them have been accomplished. I see no cause that would make me think that anyone in this world of beings, together with the gods, Māra, Brahmā, those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins, could in truth argue, ‘Even if they have been accomplished they do not put an end to outflows.’  Because I do not see any cause here, I have found happiness, found fearlessness, found a ground for self-confidence, and claim as my state the exalted state of the dominant bull. I roar the lion’s perfect roar in the assembly. I, Brahmā-like, turn the wheel that no one in this world—not a god or Māra or Brahmā or one leading a secluded religious life or a brahmin—can in truth turn. And that, furthermore, is by way of not apprehending anything.
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four detailed and thorough knowledges. What are the four? They are detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings, detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas, detailed and thorough knowledge of creative explanations, and detailed and thorough knowledge of confidence giving a readiness to speak. It is knowledge, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. What are the eighteen?
 Between the night when tathāgatas awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and the night when they pass into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, while tathāgatas teach the world of beings together with the gods, Māra, Brahmā, those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins, together with gods, humans, and asuras the path that puts an end to suffering, they do not go wrong, do not shout out, are not robbed of mindfulness, do not discriminate differences, do not have uncollected thoughts,  are not inconsiderately dispassionate, are not deficient in yearning, are not deficient in perseverance, are not deficient in recollection, are not deficient in meditative stabilization, are not deficient in wisdom, are not deficient in liberation, and are not deficient in seeing into knowledge of liberation. All physical actions are preceded by knowledge and informed by knowledge, all verbal actions are preceded by knowledge and informed by knowledge, all mental actions are preceded by knowledge and informed by knowledge; they see past time with knowledge free from attachment and free from obstruction, they see future time with knowledge free from attachment and free from obstruction, and they see the present time with knowledge free from attachment and free from obstruction, and that, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “That, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the dhāraṇī gateways. What are the dhāraṇī gateways? It is like this: there is the sameness of the way the letters work, the letters as gateways, and entrances through letters. 
 “What are the letters as gateways and entrance through letters? The letter a is the gateway to all dharmas because they are unproduced from the very beginning (ādy-anutpannatvād); ra is a gateway to all dharmas because they are without dirt (rajas); pa is a gateway to all dharmas because they are ultimately (paramārtha) without distinctions;tsa is a gateway to all dharmas because of the way death (cyavana) and rebirth are unfindable; na is a gateway to all dharmas because names (nāman) have gone, because of the way names are unfindable; la is a gateway to all dharmas because they transcend the ordinary world (loka), because the vine (latā) of craving and the causes and conditions have been destroyed; da is a gateway to all dharmas because tamed (dānta) and staying tamed (damatha) have a certain limit; ba is a gateway to all dharmas because they are free from bonds (bandhana); ḍa is a gateway to all dharmas because disorder (ḍamara) has gone; sa is a gateway to all dharmas because attachment (saṅga) is unfindable; wa is a gateway to all dharmas because the sound of speech paths (vākpatha) has been cut; ta is a gateway to all dharmas because they do not wander from suchness (tathatā); ya is a gateway to all dharmas because in fact (yathāvat) they are not produced; sta is a gateway to all dharmas because they have nothing to be pretentious about (stambha);ka is a gateway to all dharmas because an agent (kāraka) is unfindable; sa is a gateway to all dharmas because they do not pass beyond sameness (samatā), and sameness is unfindable; ma is a gateway to all dharmas because taking something as ‘mine’ (mamakāra) is unfindable; ga is a gateway to all dharmas because going (gamana) is unfindable; tha is a gateway to all dharmas because a standing place ([s]thāna) is unfindable; dza is a gateway to all dharmas because birth (jāti) is unfindable; shwa is a gateway to all dharmas because breath (śvāsa) is unfindable; dha is a gateway to all dharmas because a dharma (dharma) is unfindable; śa is a gateway to all dharmas because calm abiding (śamatha) is unfindable; kha is a gateway to all dharmas because a state the same as the sky (kha) is unfindable; kṣa is a gateway to all dharmas because extinction (kṣaya) is unfindable; dzjnā is a gateway to all dharmas because knowledge (jñāna) is unfindable; ha is a gateway to all dharmas because a cause (hetu) is unfindable; bha is a gateway to all dharmas because destruction (bhaṅga) is unfindable; tsha is a gateway to all dharmas because a beautiful skin color (chavi) is unfindable; sma is a gateway to all dharmas because mindfulness (smaraṇa) is unfindable; hva is a gateway to all dharmas because calling out (āhvāna) is unfindable; tsa is a gateway to all dharmas because eagerness (utsāha) for dharmas is unfindable; gha is a gateway to all dharmas because density (ghana) in dharmas is unfindable; ṭha is a gateway to all dharmas because establishment (viṭhapana) is unfindable; ṇa is a gateway to all dharmas because conflict (raṇa) is unfindable; pha is a gateway to all dharmas because a result (phala) is unfindable; ska is a gateway to all dharmas because aggregates (skandha) are unfindable; dza is a gateway to all dharmas because old age (jarā) is unfindable; tsa is a gateway to all dharmas because conduct (caraṇa) is unfindable; ṭa is a gateway to all dharmas because harm (ṭākara) is unfindable; and ḍha is a gateway to all dharmas because grasping at something as ‘I’ ([ḍ]haṃkāra) is unfindable.
 “There is no expression as a letter above and beyond these. And why? Because there is no name at all by which anything might be conventionally designated, or by which anything might be expressed, expounded, realized, or seen. Like this, Subhūti, you should understand that all dharmas are like space. 
 “Subhūti, this letter a, and so on, the entrance into the teaching, is the entrance through a dhāraṇī gateway. 
 “Subhūti, any bodhisattva great beings who come to know this skill in the letter a, and so on, will not become perplexed whatever the sound, will succeed though the sameness of dharmas, and will gain skill in understanding sounds.
 “Subhūti, you should know that there are twenty benefits for any bodhisattva great beings  who hear these spoken words stamped with the letter a, and so on, the letter a, and so on, that are the entry stamp, and who, having heard them, with a continuum of mental certainty take them up, bear them in mind, read them out loud, and master and expound them in detail to others by way of not apprehending anything.
 “What are the twenty? They will have mindfulness, will have intelligence, will have understanding, will have awareness, will have steadfastness, will have a sense of shame, will have wisdom, and will have a confidence giving a readiness to speak. They will also gain this dhāraṇī gateway with little difficulty, will not become tongue-tied and will not be of two minds, and will not become attracted even when they hear smooth words from somebody else, will not get offended when they hear harsh words, will not be uplifted and will not be put down, and will remain in an ordinary state. They will also become skilled in sounds, will become skilled in aggregates, will become skilled in constituents, will become skilled in sense fields, will become skilled in dependent origination, will become skilled in causes, will become skilled in conditions, will become skilled in the true nature of dharmas, will become skilled in knowing higher and lower faculties, will become skilled in knowing the thoughts of others, will become skilled in knowledge of the performance of miraculous power, will become skilled in knowing the divine eye, will become skilled in knowledge that recollects past lives, will become skilled in knowledge of death and rebirth, will become skilled in knowledge that outflows are extinguished, will become skilled in knowing what is possible and impossible, and will become skilled in going, skilled in returning,  and skilled in the ways of carrying themselves. 
 “That dhāraṇī gateway, Subhūti, the letter a, and so on, that are the entrance, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.”
This was the sixteenth chapter, “Dhāraṇī Gateway,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 17: Level Purification
“Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘How have bodhisattva great beings come to set out in the Great Vehicle?’—Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections change place, going from level to level. And how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections change place, going from level to level? Like this: by all dharmas not changing place. And why? Because no dharma comes, or goes, or changes place, or is close to changing places. But even though they do not falsely project the level of those dharmas, do not direct their thoughts toward them, they still do the purification for a level, and they do not view those levels. 
 “And what is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification? Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the first level, Pramuditā, have to do ten purifications for that level. What are the ten? They are purification of the surpassing aspiration, and that by way of not apprehending anything; purification of the basis for beneficial work through not apprehending causal signs; purification of the same state of mind toward all beings through not apprehending beings; purification of giving up things through not apprehending a gift, giver, or recipient; purification of serving spiritual friends because of not falsely projecting anything on account of them;  purification of seeking the doctrine through not apprehending any dharma; purification of constant renunciation through not apprehending a home; purification of longing for the body of a buddha through not apprehending the causal signs of the auspicious major and minor signs; purification of an exposition of dharmas through not apprehending an analysis of dharmas; purification of preventing being puffed up with pride through not apprehending a state of existence; and purification of making truth statements through not apprehending a statement. These, Subhūti, are the ten purifications bodhisattva great beings occupying the first level, Pramuditā, have to do.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the second level have to constantly pay attention to eight dharmas and focus on them in practice. What are the eight? They are completely pure morality, a feeling of appreciation and gratitude, a foundation of the power of patience, an experience of great delight and joy, not ignoring any being, being deeply moved by great compassion, great reverence because of venerating gurus with faith and by imagining them as the Teacher, and seeking the perfections through the practice of them. These, Subhūti, are the eight dharmas bodhisattva great beings occupying the second level have to constantly pay attention to and focus on in practice.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the third level have to keep on with five dharmas. What are the five? They have to keep on with great learning without complacency, and that without settling down on words; with expositions of the gift of Dharma without concern for material possessions but not falsely projecting anything on account of that; in raising up and transforming wholesome roots for the purification of a buddhafield but not falsely projecting anything on account of that;  with not feeling oppressed by immeasurable cycles of existence but not falsely projecting anything on account of that; and with an abiding sense of shame and embarrassment but not falsely projecting anything on account of those either. Bodhisattva great beings occupying the third level, Subhūti, have to keep on with these five dharmas.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the fourth level have to appropriate and keep ten dharmas and should not give them up. What are the ten? Not giving up dwelling in the forest, having few desires, contentment, not giving up the qualities of the ascetic or austerity, not giving up training, abhorring sense objects, production of a thought associated with nirvāṇa, giving up all possessions, an unmixed mind, and not relying on anything. These, Subhūti, are the ten dharmas a bodhisattva great being occupying the fourth level should not give up and that they have to appropriate and keep. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the fifth level have to avoid ten dharmas. What are the ten? They have to avoid getting tied up with householders, avoid getting tied up with monks and nuns, stop envying status families, avoid places where people get together, stop bearing malice, stop praising themselves and disparaging others, stop the ten unwholesome actions, avoid haughtiness and pride in being superior, stop distortions, avoid doubt, and avoid the propensity for greed, hatred, and confusion. These, Subhūti, are the ten dharmas bodhisattva great beings occupying the fifth level should avoid. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the sixth level have to complete six dharmas. What are the six? They have to complete the six perfections. There are also another six dharmas they have to avoid. What are the six? They have to avoid śrāvaka states of mind, avoid pratyekabuddha states of mind, avoid wearied states of mind, avoid feeling cowed when they see a beggar, avoid feeling unhappy about all the things they have given up, and not rebuff beggars. These, Subhūti, are the six dharmas bodhisattva great beings occupying the sixth level should avoid.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, there are twenty dharmas that bodhisattva great beings occupying the seventh level should not do. What are the twenty? They should not seize on a self, seize on a sentient being, seize on a living being, seize on a person, seize on annihilation, seize on permanence, perceive a causal sign, view that it is a cause, settle down on name and form, settle down on the aggregates, settle down on the sense fields, settle down on the constituents, settle down on the three realms, cling to the three realms, wallow in the three realms, settle down on the view that the Buddha should be resorted to, settle down on the view that the Dharma should be resorted to, settle down on the view that the Saṅgha should be resorted to, settle down on the view that morality is a place to resort to, or get depressed that  ‘all dharmas are empty’ and oppose emptiness. These, Subhūti, are the twenty dharmas that bodhisattva great beings occupying the seventh level should not do. 
 “Occupying the seventh level, they also have to complete exactly twenty dharmas. What are the twenty? They are the realization of emptiness, the actualization of signlessness, the knowledge of wishlessness, the purification of the three spheres, empathy and compassion for all beings, not looking down on those beings, viewing the sameness of all dharmas and not settling down on it, realizing the way things are perfect without falsely projecting anything on account of it, forbearance for nonproduction, the knowledge of nonproduction, the exposition of the one way things are, total destruction of thought constructions concerning all phenomena, reversal of views, reversal of afflictions, the level of meditation on calm abiding and skill in insight, a disciplined state of mind, a calmed state of mind, unobstructed knowledge, the attachment-free level, and going as they want to any buddhafield. These, Subhūti, are the twenty dharmas that bodhisattva great beings occupying the seventh level should complete. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the eighth level have to complete four dharmas. What are the four? They have to read the minds of all beings, play with the clairvoyances, view the buddhafields and fully execute them exactly as they have seen them to be, and attend on the buddhas and properly contemplate the buddha bodies. These, Subhūti, are the four dharmas they should complete. Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings  occupying the eighth level have to complete four other dharmas. What are the four? They have to know higher and lower faculties, they have to purify a buddhafield, they have to be constantly absorbed in the illusion-like meditative stabilization, and they have to intentionally appropriate an existence and bring into being a body in line with the outcome of the wholesome roots of beings. These, Subhūti, are the four other dharmas bodhisattva great beings occupying the eighth level have to complete.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the ninth level have to complete twelve dharmas. What are the twelve? They are the assistance of unending prayers; success in line with the prayers that are made; understanding knowledge of the sounds of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and ghosts; understanding a river of confidence giving a readiness to speak; and perfect entry into a womb, a perfect family, a perfect social class and lineage, a perfect retinue, a perfect birth, perfect going forth, the perfect spreading out of a Bodhi tree, and the perfect completion of good qualities. These, Subhūti, are the twelve dharmas bodhisattva great beings occupying the ninth level have to complete. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the tenth level have to be called just ‘tathāgata.’ ”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti inquired of him, “Lord,  what is done in purification of the surpassing aspiration of bodhisattva great beings occupying the first level?”
 The Lord replied, “With attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects, the full accomplishment of all wholesome roots, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of the surpassing aspiration.
 “What is the purification of the same state of mind toward all beings? With attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects the full accomplishment of the four immeasurables—love, compassion, joy, and equanimity—Subhūti, is said to be the purification of the same state of mind toward all beings.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of giving up? Giving gifts to all beings without conceptualization, Subhūti, is said to be the purification of giving up.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of serving spiritual friends? There serving, attending on, and having great reverence for those spiritual friends, the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings who cause them to take up and enter into the knowledge of all aspects and establish them in it, Subhūti, are said to be the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of serving spiritual friends. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of seeking the doctrine? There with a thought connected with the knowledge of all aspects they seek the doctrine and do not fall to the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level. That, Subhūti, is said to be the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of seeking the doctrine. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of constant renunciation? In all lifetimes they are aloof and renounced, they go forth to homelessness into the Tathāgata’s doctrine, and nobody hinders them. That, Subhūti, is said to be the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of constant renunciation. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of longing for the body of a buddha? Having seen the body of a buddha they never become separated from attention to the buddha until they reach the knowledge of all aspects. That, Subhūti, is said to be the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of longing for the body of a buddha.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of an exposition of doctrines? Whether the Tathāgata is here before us or whether gone into nirvāṇa, the bodhisattva great beings teach doctrine, illuminating for beings the spiritual life good at the beginning, good in the middle, and good at the end, excellent in meaning, excellent in wording, unadulterated, complete, purified, and completely pure—that is to say, the discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, verses, summaries, introductions, accounts, birth stories, expanded texts, marvels, tales, and expositions. That, Subhūti, is said to be the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of an exposition of doctrines.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of overcoming  being puffed up with pride? Overcoming being puffed up with pride on account of which they are not born in lower status families, Subhūti, is said to be the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of overcoming being puffed up with pride.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of making truth statements? That they do what they say, Subhūti, is said to be the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of making truth statements.
 “Those ten, Subhūti, are the purifications bodhisattva great beings occupying the first level have to do.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ completely pure morality? It is this: not paying attention to śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha states of mind, to what makes for an immorality, or to any of those dharmas that constitute a hindrance to awakening either. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ completely pure morality.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ feeling of appreciation and gratitude? Let alone something big, when bodhisattva great beings are doing their practice they do not consign to oblivion even a tiny benefit done, up until the end of saṃsāra. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ feeling of appreciation and gratitude.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ foundation of the power of patience? The absence of malicious and violent thoughts toward all beings is the bodhisattva great beings’ foundation of the power of patience. 
 “What do bodhisattva great beings experience as great delight and joy?  Bringing beings to maturity in the three vehicles is what bodhisattva great beings experience as great delight and joy. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ not ignoring any being? Guarding all beings is the bodhisattva great beings’ not ignoring any being.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ being deeply moved by great compassion? When doing a practice it occurs to bodhisattva great beings, ‘I would stay in the hells for the sake of each being for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, and until I have established those beings in the knowledge of a buddha, I would undergo amputation, quartering, mutilation through torture, boiling, and being cooked, and similarly, for the sake of all beings, all the while I would be enthusiastic and not become depressed.’ That is the bodhisattva great beings’ being deeply moved by great compassion.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ great reverence because of venerating gurus with faith? It is this: imagining the gurus as the Teacher. That is called the bodhisattva great beings’ great reverence because of venerating gurus with faith.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ seeking the perfections through the practice of them? It is this: in order to bring all beings to maturity, seeking the perfections without doing other work. That is called the bodhisattva great beings’ seeking the perfections through the practice of them.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’  great learning without complacency? It is not being complacent, but rather thinking, ‘I will bear in mind whatever the lord buddhas have spoken in this world system or in world systems all around in the ten directions.’ That is the bodhisattva great beings’ great learning without complacency.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ exposition of the gift of Dharma without concern for material possessions? Bodhisattva great beings teach the Dharma, but without hoping for anything at all, even for personal awakening from the wholesome root that comes from the gift of Dharma. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ exposition of the gift of Dharma without concern for material possessions.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ raising up and transforming wholesome roots for the purification of a buddhafield? They thoroughly establish those wholesome roots that purify the field of their own and others’ buddhafields with whichever wholesome roots cause the purification of a buddhafield. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ raising up and transforming wholesome roots for the purification of a buddhafield.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ not feeling oppressed by immeasurable cycles of existence? In a stable state on account of wholesome roots, they bring beings to maturity with those wholesome roots on account of which they are stable, purify a buddhafield, and never fall into feeling oppressed up until they have completed all the buddhadharmas and the knowledge of all aspects. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ not feeling oppressed by immeasurable cycles of existence.
 “What  is the bodhisattva great beings’ abiding sense of shame and embarrassment? It is the abhorrence of śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha states of mind. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ abiding sense of shame and embarrassment. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ not giving up dwelling in the forest? It is the transcendence of the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ not giving up dwelling in the forest. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ having few desires? It is the bodhisattva great beings’ not desiring even awakening. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ having few desires. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ contentment? Not falsely projecting even reaching the knowledge of all aspects. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ contentment. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ not giving up the qualities of the ascetic or austerity? It is this: forbearance for meditation on the deep dharmas. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ not giving up the qualities of the ascetic or austerity. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ not giving up training? It is where all training is without movement. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ not giving up training. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ abhorrence of sense objects? It is not producing desire realm states of mind. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ abhorrence  of sense objects. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ production of a thought associated with nirvāṇa? It is this: not causing all the dharmas to come into being. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ production of a thought associated with nirvāṇa. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ giving up all possessions? It is not grasping inner or outer dharmas. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ giving up all possessions. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ unmixed mind? Their minds not connecting with the foundations of consciousnesses is the bodhisattva great beings’ unmixed mind. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ not relying on anything? Not paying attention to all things is the bodhisattva great beings’ not relying on anything. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ avoidance of getting tied up with householders? It is this: roaming from buddhafield to buddhafield and miraculously taking birth, appearing with a shaved head and wearing saffron-colored robes. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ avoidance of getting tied up with householders. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ avoidance of getting tied up with monks and nuns? They do not stay with monks and nuns even for as long as a finger snap, and when they are absent they do not worry. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ avoidance of getting tied up  with monks and nuns. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ stopping envying status families? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings have to think as follows: ‘I have to supply all beings with their requirements for happiness. These beings here are happy just because of their own merits, so I should not think envious thoughts about this.’ That is the bodhisattva great beings’ stopping envying status families.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ avoiding places where people get together? Bodhisattva great beings should not get together with people in any place where there might be śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, where the conversations might be connected with them, or where there might be the production of thoughts that are connected with them. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ avoiding places where people get together. 
 “How do bodhisattva great beings stop feeling malice? They do not give an opportunity for malicious thoughts or violent thoughts, and they do not give an opportunity for thinking about fighting or thinking about quarrelling. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ stopping feeling malice. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ stopping praising themselves? Not viewing inner dharmas is the bodhisattva great beings’ stopping praising themselves.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ stopping disparaging others? It is this:  not viewing outer dharmas. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ stopping disparaging others. 
 “How do bodhisattva great beings stop the ten unwholesome actions? Let alone the noble path, let alone awakening, because these ten unwholesome actions are even a hindrance to a good form of life, bodhisattva great beings stop them.
 “How do bodhisattva great beings avoid pride in being superior? Let alone something additional that would make them think they are superior, because they do not view any dharma at all bodhisattva great beings avoid pride in being superior.
 “How do bodhisattva great beings avoid haughtiness? It is because they do not view any real basis on which they could become haughty that bodhisattva great beings avoid haughtiness.
 “How do bodhisattva great beings stop distortions? Given that real bases are unfindable, bodhisattva great beings stop distortions. 
 “How do bodhisattva great beings avoid the propensity for greed, hatred, and confusion? It is because of not viewing a real basis for greed, hatred, and confusion that bodhisattva great beings avoid the propensity for greed, hatred, and confusion.
 “What are the six dharmas bodhisattva great beings on the sixth level  have to complete? They are these six perfections: the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom. They have to complete those perfections. The lord buddhas, and śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas as well, having stood in these six perfections, have gone, are going, and will go to the other side of the five oceans of knowable things. What are the five? They are these: the past, the future, the present, the inexpressible, and the uncompounded. Thus should bodhisattva great beings complete the six perfections.
 “There bodhisattva great beings somehow have to avoid śrāvaka thought. And why? Because it is not the path to awakening. 
 “They have to avoid pratyekabuddha thought. And why? Because it is not the path to awakening. 
 “They have to avoid a wearied state of mind. And why? Because it is not the path to awakening. 
 “They should not feel cowed when they see a beggar. And why? Because it is not the path to awakening.
 “They should not feel unhappy about all the things they have given up. And why? Because it is not the path to awakening.
 “Having produced the first thought, from then on they should always give gifts and should not let that thought be in vain. 
 “They have to avoid those six dharmas.
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not seize on a self because a self absolutely does not exist. Construe seize on a sentient being, seize on a living being, and seize on a person similarly as well. And why? Because they absolutely do not exist. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not seize on annihilation. And why? Because all dharmas have not been produced, so no dharma at all is annihilated. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not seize on permanence, because a dharma that is not produced is not permanent and is not annihilated. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not perceive a causal sign, because defilement absolutely does not exist. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not view it as a cause. And why? Because they do not consider that view. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not settle down on name and form. And why? Because those things cannot be apprehended. Thus should bodhisattva great beings not settle down on name and form.
 “Similarly, they should not settle down on the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields. And why? Because those dharmas do not exist through their intrinsic natures. Thus should they not settle down on the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields.
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not settle down on the three realms. And why? Because they do not exist through their intrinsic natures. Thus should they not settle down on the three realms. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not cling to the three realms. And why? Because those things do not exist and cannot be apprehended. Thus should bodhisattva  great beings not cling to the three realms. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not wallow in the three realms. And why? Because they have no intrinsic nature. Thus should bodhisattva great beings not wallow in the three realms. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not resort to a view of the Buddha. And why? Because by resorting to a view of the Buddha they do not see the Buddha. Thus should bodhisattva great beings not resort to a view of the Buddha. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not resort to a view of the Dharma. And why? Because by resorting to a view of the Dharma they do not see the Dharma. Thus should bodhisattva great beings not resort to a view of the Dharma. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not resort to a view of the Saṅgha. And why? Because by resorting to a view of the Saṅgha they do not see the Saṅgha. Thus should bodhisattva great beings not resort to a view of the Saṅgha. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not settle down on the view that morality is a place to resort to. And why? Because from resorting to a view of morality, morality does not become pure. Thus should bodhisattva great beings not settle down on the view that morality is a place to resort to. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not get depressed that ‘all dharmas are empty,’ because they are empty of their own particular characteristics, not empty of emptiness. Thus should bodhisattva great beings  not get depressed that ‘all dharmas are empty.’ 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow not oppose emptiness, because the empty is an emptiness of its own particular characteristic, therefore emptiness does not oppose emptiness. Thus should bodhisattva great beings not oppose emptiness. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should somehow realize emptiness, because the empty is the emptiness of emptiness, and they do not cause emptiness to be realized in emptiness. Thus should bodhisattva great beings realize emptiness. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ actualization of signlessness? It is this: not paying attention to any dharma.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of wishlessness? It is this: that all beings in the three realms have no fixed position.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of the three spheres? It is this: the completion of the ten wholesome actions. 
 “What is the completion of the bodhisattva great beings’ empathy and compassion for all beings? It is this: gaining great compassion. 
 “How do bodhisattva great beings not look down on all beings? It is this: because of the purity of the field of beings. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ view of the sameness of all dharmas? It is this: not adding to and not taking away from all dharmas. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ realization of the way things are perfect? It is the absence of a realization of all dharmas. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’  forbearance for nonproduction? The forbearance for all dharmas that are not produced, do not stop, and do not occasion anything is forbearance for nonproduction.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of nonproduction? The knowledge that name and form are not produced is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of nonproduction.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ exposition of the one way things are? The absence of habitual ideas about dual phenomena is the exposition of the one way things are.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ total destruction of thought constructions? It is not entertaining any notion of any dharma.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ reversal of views? It is the reversal of all the views of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ reversal of afflictions? It is the forsaking of all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ level of calm abiding and insight? It is this: the knowledge of a knower of all aspects.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ disciplined state of mind? It is not taking pleasure in the three realms.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ calmed state of mind? It is when all six faculties do not radiate out.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ unobstructed knowledge? It is obtaining the buddha eye. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge that does not enter into attachment? It is remaining indifferent to the six sense fields. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ going as they want to any field? It is displaying  a body wherever there is a circle of retainers. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ reading the minds of all beings? It is knowing with their minds the minds and mental factors of all beings. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ play with the clairvoyances? Playing with the clairvoyances, they roam from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to see the buddhas, but without entertaining any notion of a buddha. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ viewing of the buddhafields? Without moving from any one buddhafield, they also appear in all buddhafields, but they do not entertain any notion of a buddhafield. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ viewing the buddhafields and fully executing them exactly as they have seen them to be? Bestriding the level of a majestic wheel-turning emperor of world systems in a great billionfold world system, they abdicate in all those world systems in order to bring beings to maturity, but without falsely projecting anything. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ attending on the buddhas? It is attending on the Dharma in order to look after beings.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ properly contemplating the buddha bodies? It is properly contemplating the body of dharmas.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of higher and lower faculties? It is standing in the ten powers and knowing the completion of the faculties by all beings. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ purification of a buddhafield? It is purifying  the minds of all beings by way of not apprehending anything. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ illusion-like meditative stabilization? It is the meditative stabilization standing in which bodhisattva great beings do all that has to be done without mentally engaging any dharma.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ constantly being absorbed in meditation? It is the bodhisattva great beings’ meditative stabilization that has arisen from maturation.
 “How do bodhisattva great beings bring into being a body in line with the outcome of the wholesome roots of beings? Here they appropriate a body, when and as they want to, in line with the outcome of the wholesome roots of beings.
 “Why do bodhisattva great beings appropriate an existence when and as they want to? It is so they will bring beings to maturity.
 “How is it that bodhisattva great beings have success in line with the prayers they have made? Here bodhisattva great beings have success in line with the prayers they have made because they have completed the six perfections.
 “How is it that bodhisattva great beings have a knowledge that comprehends the sounds of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and ghosts? It is this: a detailed and thorough knowledge of creative explanations. 
 “How is it that bodhisattva great beings understand a river of confidence giving a readiness to speak? It is this: a detailed and thorough knowledge of the confidence giving a readiness to speak. 
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect entry into a womb? The bodhisattva great beings’  taking birth here miraculously in all lifetimes is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect entry into a womb.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect family? That bodhisattva great beings take birth in great families is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect family.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect social class? That bodhisattva great beings take birth in great sāla tree–like royal families and great sāla tree–like brahmin families is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect social class.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect lineage? That bodhisattva great beings descend on the mother’s side as have the bodhisattvas of the past is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect lineage.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect retinue? It is this, namely, having established beings in awakening, they have just a retinue of bodhisattvas. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect retinue.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect birth? At the moment of their birth, illumination spreads though all the world systems and causes them to shake in six ways. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect birth.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect going forth? Bodhisattva great beings  go forth to homelessness with many one hundred thousand one hundred million billion beings, and those beings become definite in the three vehicles. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect going forth.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect spreading out of a Bodhi tree? It has a golden root, a trunk made of beryl, and branches, leaves, and petals made of the seven precious stones. Those branches, leaves, and petals spread an illumination as far as the infinite world systems in the ten directions. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect spreading out of a Bodhi tree.
 “What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect completion of good qualities? The bodhisattva great beings’ purification of a buddhafield through bringing beings to maturity is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfect completion of good qualities.
 “Why is it bodhisattva great beings occupying the tenth level have to be called just ‘tathāgata’? When bodhisattva great beings have completed all ten perfections, up to have completed the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and knowledge of a knower of all aspects; have eliminated all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions; and have completed all buddha dharmas, because of that, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings occupying the tenth level have therefore to be called just ‘tathāgata.’ 
 “Subhūti, what are the ten levels of bodhisattva great beings? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing all six perfections with skillful means, trained in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to practicing the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha pass beyond the Śuklavipaśyanā level and pass beyond the Gotra level, Aṣṭamaka level, Darśana level, Tanū level, Vītarāga level, Kṛtāvin level, Pratyekabuddha level, and Bodhisattva level—that is to say, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings pass beyond these nine levels and stand on the buddha level. Those, Subhūti, are the ten levels of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Thus, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle.”
This was the seventeenth chapter, “Level Purification,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 18: The Exposition of Going Forth in the Great Vehicle
“Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘From where will the Great Vehicle go forth?’—it will go forth from the three realms and will stand wherever there is knowledge of all aspects, and it will stand, furthermore, by way of nonduality. And why? Because, Subhūti, these two dharmas—the Great Vehicle and the knowledge of all aspects—are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. And why? Because, Subhūti, a dharma without a mark is not going forth, nor will it go forth, nor has it gone forth.  Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of suchness that it goes forth. Similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the very limit of reality, the inconceivable element, the abandonment element, the detachment element, and the cessation element that they go forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of suchness does not go forth from the three realms. And why? Because suchness is empty of the intrinsic nature of suchness.” 
Connect this in the same way with each, up to the cessation element. 
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the emptiness of form that it goes forth. Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the emptiness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness that it goes forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the emptiness of form will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. The emptiness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, form is empty of form, and feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of consciousness. 
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the emptiness of the eyes that it goes forth.  Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the emptiness of the ears . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . and the thinking mind that it goes forth. Similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the emptiness of a form . . . , and the emptiness of a sound . . . , a smell . . . , a taste . . . , a feeling . . . , and a dharma . . . ; the emptiness of the eye consciousness . . . , and the emptiness of the ear . . . , the nose . . . , the tongue . . . , the body . . . , and the thinking-mind consciousness . . . ; the emptiness of eye contact . . . , and the emptiness of ear . . . , nose . . . , tongue . . . , body . . . , and thinking-mind contact; the emptiness of the feeling that arises from eye contact . . . , and the emptiness of the feeling that arises from ear . . . , nose . . . , tongue . . . , body . . . , and thinking-mind contact that it goes forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the emptiness of the eyes will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. Connect this in the same way with each, up to the emptiness of the feeling that arises from thinking-mind contact will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, eyes are empty of eyes. Connect this in the same way with each, up to because the feeling that arises from thinking-mind contact is empty of the feeling that arises from thinking-mind contact. 
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of a dream that it goes forth. Similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of an illusion, a mirage, an echo, an apparition, or a tathāgata’s  magical creation that it goes forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of a dream will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects, and similarly, Subhūti, because the intrinsic nature of an illusion, a mirage, an echo, an apparition, or a tathāgata’s magical creation will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of a dream is empty of the intrinsic nature of a dream, the intrinsic nature of an illusion is empty of the intrinsic nature of an illusion, the intrinsic nature of a mirage is empty of the intrinsic nature of a mirage, the intrinsic nature of an echo is empty of the intrinsic nature of an echo, the intrinsic nature of an apparition is empty of the intrinsic nature of an apparition, and the intrinsic nature of a tathāgata’s magical creation is empty of the intrinsic nature of a tathāgata’s magical creation.
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the perfection of giving that it goes forth. Similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, or the perfection of wisdom that it goes forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects, and similarly, because the intrinsic nature of the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom will not go forth  from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving is empty of the intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving, and similarly, the intrinsic nature of the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is empty of the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of inner emptiness that it goes forth. Similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature that it goes forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of inner emptiness . . . up to the intrinsic nature of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of inner emptiness is empty of the intrinsic nature of inner emptiness . . . up to the intrinsic nature of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty of the intrinsic nature of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. 
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the applications of mindfulness that they go forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the applications of mindfulness will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the applications of mindfulness is empty of the intrinsic nature of the applications of mindfulness. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or the path that it goes forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of . . . up to the path will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, the path is empty of the path. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha that they go forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the buddhadharmas will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, the buddhadharmas are empty of the buddhadharmas.
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the worthy ones that they go forth. And similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the pratyekabuddhas, the bodhisattvas, and the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas that they go forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the worthy one, the intrinsic nature of the pratyekabuddha, the intrinsic nature of the bodhisattva, and the intrinsic nature of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly  complete buddha will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the worthy one is empty of the intrinsic nature of the worthy one, the intrinsic nature of the pratyekabuddha is empty of the intrinsic nature of the pratyekabuddha, the intrinsic nature of the bodhisattva is empty of the intrinsic nature of the bodhisattva, and the intrinsic nature of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha is empty of the intrinsic nature of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha.
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the result of stream enterer that it goes forth. And similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, the knowledge of path aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects that they go forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the result of stream enterer will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects, and similarly, Subhūti, because the intrinsic nature of the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, the knowledge of path aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the result of stream enterer is empty of the intrinsic nature of the result of stream enterer, and similarly, Subhūti, because the intrinsic nature of the result of once-returner . . . the result of non-returner . . . the state of a worthy one . . . a pratyekabuddha’s awakening . . .  the knowledge of path aspects . . . and the knowledge of all aspects is empty of the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of a name that it goes forth. And similarly, Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of a causal sign . . . a conventional term . . . a communication . . . or a designation that it goes forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of a designation will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, a designation is empty of the intrinsic nature of a designation. 
 “Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of nonproduction that it goes forth. Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of nonstopping . . . nondefilement . . . nonpurification . . . and not occasioning anything that it goes forth. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of not occasioning anything will not go forth from the three realms, and it will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Subhūti, not occasioning anything is empty of the intrinsic nature of not occasioning anything. 
 “Thus, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle will not go forth from the three realms and will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects. That vehicle does not move. 
“Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘Where will the Great Vehicle stand?’—that  vehicle will not stand anywhere. And why? Because no dharma stands. And yet, Subhūti, that vehicle will stand by way of not standing. Subhūti, it is like this: suchness does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. Subhūti, it is like this: the very limit of reality and the inconceivable element do not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of suchness does not stand or not stand, and the intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality and the inconceivable element does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of suchness is empty of the intrinsic nature of suchness, and similarly the intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality is empty of the intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality, and the intrinsic nature of the inconceivable element is empty of the intrinsic nature of the inconceivable element.
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the space element does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. Subhūti, it is like this: the abandonment element, detachment element, and cessation element do not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the space element does not stand or not stand,  and the intrinsic nature of the abandonment element, the intrinsic nature of the detachment element, and the intrinsic nature of the cessation element does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of the space element is empty of the intrinsic nature of the space element, the intrinsic nature of the abandonment element is empty of the intrinsic nature of the abandonment element, the intrinsic nature of the detachment element is empty of the intrinsic nature of the detachment element, and the intrinsic nature of the cessation element is empty of the intrinsic nature of the cessation element. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the emptiness of form does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. Subhūti, it is like this: the emptiness of feeling, emptiness of perception, emptiness of volitional factors, and emptiness of consciousness does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of form does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of consciousness does not stand or not stand. And why? Because form is empty of form, up to consciousness is empty of consciousness. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the emptiness of the eyes does not stand or not stand, up to the emptiness of the thinking mind does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the eyes does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of the thinking mind does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the eyes are empty of eyes, up to the thinking mind is empty of thinking mind. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the emptiness of a form does not stand or not stand, up to the emptiness of a dharma does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of a form does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of a dharma does not stand or not stand. And why? Subhūti, it is because a form is empty of a form, up to a dharma is empty of a dharma. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the emptiness of the eye consciousness does not stand or not stand, up to the emptiness of the thinking-mind consciousness does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the eye consciousness does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of the thinking-mind consciousness does not stand or not stand. And why? Subhūti, it is because the eye consciousness is empty of eye consciousness, up to the thinking-mind consciousness is empty of thinking mind consciousness. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the emptiness of eye contact does not stand or not stand, up to the emptiness of thinking-mind contact does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti,  the intrinsic nature of eye contact does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of thinking-mind contact does not stand or not stand. And why? Subhūti, it is because eye contact is empty of eye contact, up to thinking-mind contact is empty of thinking-mind contact. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the emptiness of the feeling that arises from eye contact does not stand or not stand, up to the emptiness of the feeling that arises from thinking-mind contact does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why, Subhūti? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the feeling that arises from eye contact does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of the feeling that arises from thinking-mind contact does not stand or not stand. And why? Subhūti, it is because the feeling that arises from eye contact is empty of the feeling that arises from eye contact, up to the feeling that arises from thinking-mind contact is empty of the feeling that arises from thinking-mind contact. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: a dream does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. Subhūti, it is like this: an illusion, mirage, echo, apparition, or tathāgata’s magical creation does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of a dream does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of a dream is empty of the intrinsic nature of a dream.  It is also because the intrinsic nature of an illusion, mirage, echo, apparition, and tathāgata’s magical creation does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of an illusion is empty of the intrinsic nature of an illusion, the intrinsic nature of a mirage is empty of the intrinsic nature of a mirage, the intrinsic nature of an echo is empty of the intrinsic nature of an echo, the intrinsic nature of an apparition is empty of the intrinsic nature of an apparition, and the intrinsic nature of a tathāgata’s magical creation is empty of the intrinsic nature of a tathāgata’s magical creation.
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the perfection of giving does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. Subhūti, it is like this: the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom do not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving does not stand or not stand, and the intrinsic nature of the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving is empty of the intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving, up to and because the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom is empty of the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom.
 “Subhūti, it is like this: inner emptiness does not stand or not stand,  and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. Subhūti, it is like this: . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of inner emptiness does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of inner emptiness is empty of the intrinsic nature of inner emptiness, up to and because the intrinsic nature of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty of the intrinsic nature of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the applications of mindfulness do not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the applications of mindfulness does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of the applications of mindfulness is empty of the intrinsic nature of the applications of mindfulness.
 “Subhūti, it is like this: . . . up to the eightfold noble path does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the eightfold noble path does not stand or not stand. And why? It is because the path is empty of the path.
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the ten powers of a tathāgata do not stand or not stand, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha  do not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the ten powers of a tathāgata does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the ten powers of a tathāgata are empty of the ten powers of a tathāgata, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the worthy one with outflows extinguished does not stand or not stand, the pratyekabuddha does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the worthy one does not stand or not stand, and the intrinsic nature of the pratyekabuddha does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of the worthy one is empty of the intrinsic nature of the worthy one, and the intrinsic nature of the pratyekabuddha is empty of the intrinsic nature of the pratyekabuddha. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: a bodhisattva great being does not stand or not stand, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the bodhisattva does not stand or not stand, and the intrinsic nature of the Tathāgata does not stand or not stand.  And why? Because the intrinsic nature of the bodhisattva is empty of the intrinsic nature of the bodhisattva, and the intrinsic nature of the Tathāgata is empty of the intrinsic nature of the Tathāgata. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this, the result of stream enterer does not stand or not stand, up to the state of a worthy one does not stand or not stand, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the result of stream enterer does not stand or not stand, up to the intrinsic nature of the state of a worthy one does not stand or not stand, and the intrinsic nature of a pratyekabuddha’s awakening does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of the result of stream enterer is empty of the intrinsic nature of the result of stream enterer, up to the intrinsic nature of the state of a worthy one is empty of the intrinsic nature of the state of a worthy one, and the intrinsic nature of a pratyekabuddha’s awakening is empty of the intrinsic nature of a pratyekabuddha’s awakening.
 “Subhūti, it is like this: the knowledge of path aspects does not stand or not stand, and the knowledge of all aspects does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of path aspects does not stand or not stand, and the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of path aspects is empty of the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of path aspects, and the intrinsic nature  of the knowledge of all aspects is empty of the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Subhūti, it is like this: a name does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. Subhūti, it is like this: a causal sign, a conventional term, a communication, and a designation do not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of a name does not stand or not stand, and the intrinsic nature of a causal sign, the intrinsic nature of a conventional term, the intrinsic nature of a communication, and the intrinsic nature of a designation does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of a name is empty of the intrinsic nature of a name, the intrinsic nature of a causal sign is empty of the intrinsic nature of a causal sign, the intrinsic nature of a conventional term is empty of the intrinsic nature of a conventional term, the intrinsic nature of a communication is empty of the intrinsic nature of a communication, and the intrinsic nature of a designation is empty of the intrinsic nature of a designation. 
 “Subhūti, it is like this: nonproduction does not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. Subhūti, it is like this: nonstopping, nondefilement, nonpurification, and not occasioning anything do not stand or not stand, and similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not stand or not stand either. And why? Because, Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of nonproduction does not stand or not stand, and the intrinsic nature of nonstopping, nondefilement, nonpurification, and not occasioning anything  does not stand or not stand. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of nonproduction is empty of the intrinsic nature of nonproduction, the intrinsic nature of nonstopping . . . nondefilement . . . nonpurification . . . and the intrinsic nature of not occasioning anything is empty of the intrinsic nature of not occasioning anything.
 “Thus, Subhūti, that vehicle, standing by way of not standing and by way of not moving, will not stand anywhere. 
 “Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘Who will go forth in the Great Vehicle?’—no one will go forth in that vehicle. And why? Because, Subhūti, that vehicle, one who goes forth, that by which one goes forth, and from where one goes forth—all those dharmas do not exist and are not apprehended; and given that all the dharmas do not exist and are not apprehended, what dharma will go forth by means of what dharma? 
 “And why? Subhūti, it is because you cannot apprehend a self because a self is extremely pure, and you cannot apprehend a sentient being, a living being, a person, one who does, one who feels, one who knows, or one who sees because they are extremely pure; you cannot apprehend suchness and you cannot apprehend the very limit of reality because they are extremely pure, and you cannot apprehend the inconceivable element because it is extremely pure; you cannot apprehend the aggregates, constituents, or sense fields because they are extremely pure; you cannot apprehend the perfection of giving because it is extremely pure, and similarly you cannot apprehend the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom because they are extremely pure; you cannot apprehend  inner emptiness because it is extremely pure, up to you cannot apprehend the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature because it is extremely pure; you cannot apprehend the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening because they are extremely pure; and you cannot apprehend the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha because they are extremely pure. Similarly, you cannot apprehend the stream enterer, once-returner, non-returner, worthy one, pratyekabuddha, bodhisattva, or tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha because they are extremely pure; and similarly, you cannot apprehend the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, the knowledge of path aspects, or the knowledge of all aspects because they are extremely pure. You cannot apprehend nonproduction because it is extremely pure, and similarly, you cannot apprehend nonstopping, nondefilement, nonpurification, and not occasioning anything because they are extremely pure. You cannot apprehend a prior limit because it is extremely pure, and similarly you cannot apprehend a later limit or the present because they are extremely pure; similarly, you cannot apprehend coming, going, remaining, death, or birth because they are extremely pure, and similarly you cannot apprehend decrease and increase because they are extremely pure. 
 “What do you not apprehend such that all is not apprehended? 
 “It is because of not apprehending the dharma-constituent that all dharmas are not apprehended. And why? Subhūti, because of not apprehending the dharma-constituent, the dharma-constituent is not apprehended; because of not apprehending nonproduction . . . nonstopping . . .  nondefilement . . . nonpurification . . . and not occasioning anything, not occasioning anything is not apprehended; because of not apprehending suchness, suchness is not apprehended; because of not apprehending the very limit of reality, the very limit of reality is not apprehended; because of not apprehending the perfection of giving, the perfection of giving is not apprehended, and because of not apprehending the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom, the perfection of wisdom is not apprehended; because of not apprehending inner emptiness, inner emptiness is not apprehended, up to because of not apprehending the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not apprehended; and because of not apprehending the applications of mindfulness, the applications of mindfulness are not apprehended. Similarly, because of not apprehending the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . and the path, the path is not apprehended; and similarly, because of not apprehending the ten powers . . . the four fearlessnesses . . . the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are not apprehended. Because of not apprehending a stream enterer, a stream enterer is not apprehended; because of not apprehending a once-returner . . . a non-returner . . . and a worthy one, a worthy one is not apprehended; because of not apprehending a pratyekabuddha, a pratyekabuddha is not apprehended, up to because of not apprehending a tathāgata, a tathāgata is not apprehended; and because of not apprehending the result of stream enterer . . . the result of once-returner . . . the result of non-returner . . .  the state of a worthy one . . . a pratyekabuddha’s awakening . . . and the state of a buddha, the state of a buddha is not apprehended. Similarly, because of not apprehending a level, the Pramuditā level is not apprehended; and because of not apprehending a level, because it is extremely pure, the Vimalā, Prabhākarī, Arciṣmatī, Sudurjayā, Abhimukhī, Dūraṃgamā, Acalā, Sādhumatī, and Dharmameghā levels are not apprehended. And also, because of not apprehending a level, ten levels are not apprehended. What are the ten? They are the first Śuklavipaśyanā level, the Gotra level, the Aṣṭamaka level, the Darśana level, the Tanū level, the Vītarāga level, the Kṛtāvin level, the Pratyekabuddha level, the Bodhisattva level, and the Buddha level. 
 “Because of inner emptiness the first level is not apprehended, up to because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the first level is not apprehended; because it is extremely pure, because of inner emptiness, up to because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, up to the tenth level is not apprehended. Because it is extremely pure, because of inner emptiness, up to because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, bringing beings to maturity is not apprehended. Because it is extremely pure, because of inner emptiness, up to because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, purification of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Because they are extremely pure, because of inner emptiness, up to because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the five eyes are not apprehended.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that will go forth in the Great Vehicle to the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending all dharmas.” 
This was the eighteenth chapter, “The Exposition of Going Forth in the Great Vehicle,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 19: Surpassing
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, you say this—‘Great Vehicle’—again and again. It surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. Is that why it is called a Great Vehicle?
 “Lord, that vehicle is equal to space. To illustrate, Lord, just as space has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure, the Great Vehicle also, Lord, has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. Such, Lord, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. Lord, you cannot apprehend the Great Vehicle coming, going, or remaining, you cannot apprehend a prior limit, cannot apprehend a later limit, and cannot apprehend a middle either. 
 “To illustrate, Lord, just as you cannot apprehend space coming, cannot apprehend it going, and cannot apprehend it remaining, you cannot apprehend the Great Vehicle coming, cannot apprehend it going, and cannot apprehend it remaining either. 
 “To illustrate, Lord, just as, because of the equality of the three time periods, you cannot apprehend space’s prior limit, cannot apprehend its later limit, and cannot apprehend its middle, similarly, Lord, you cannot apprehend the Great Vehicle’s prior limit, cannot apprehend its later limit, and cannot apprehend its middle either. This, Lord—that is, the Great Vehicle—is a vehicle equally of the three time periods.  That is why ‘Great Vehicle’ is said again and again.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” the Lord replied. “The bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is this, namely, the six perfections—the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom. That is called the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is this: all the dhāraṇī gateways, all the meditative stabilization gateways from the śūraṅgama meditative stabilization up to the ākāśāsaṃga­vimukti­nirupalepa meditative stabilization. That is called the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is this: inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. That is called the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle is this: the four applications of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four legs of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven limbs of awakening, and the eightfold noble path, as well as the ten powers of a tathāgata, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. That is called the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, where you have said, ‘This Great Vehicle  surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth,’ what is ‘the world with its gods, humans, and asuras,’ namely, the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm? 
 “Here, Subhūti, if the desire realm were to be factual, unmistaken, unaltered, not an error, suchness, the real, true, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, qualified by not changing, and not nonexistent—this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the desire realm is all a construction, a creation, a narrative, impermanent, unstable, not eternal, qualified by change, not existent, and nonexistent that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the form realm were to be factual, unmistaken, unaltered, not an error, suchness, the real, true, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, qualified by being unchangeable, and not nonexistent—this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the form realm is all a construction, a creation, a narrative, impermanent, unstable, not eternal, qualified by change, not existent, and nonexistent that this Great Vehicle  surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the formless realm were to be factual, unmistaken, unaltered, not an error, suchness, the real, true, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, qualified by not changing, and not nonexistent—this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the formless realm is all a construction, a creation, a narrative, impermanent, unstable, not eternal, qualified by change, not existent, and nonexistent that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if form were to be factual, unmistaken, unaltered, not an error, suchness, the real, true, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, qualified by not changing, and not nonexistent—this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because form is all a construction, a creation, a narrative, impermanent, unstable, not eternal, qualified by change, not existent, and nonexistent that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, if feeling, perception, volitional factors,  and consciousness were to be factual, unmistaken, unaltered, not an error, suchness, the real, true, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, qualified by not changing, and not nonexistent—this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . consciousness is all a construction, a creation, a narrative, impermanent, unstable, not eternal, qualified by change, not existent, and nonexistent that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, connect this in the same way with if the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind; a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma; the eye consciousness, and ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind consciousness; eye contact, and ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact; and the feeling that arises from eye contact, and the feeling that arises from ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact were to be factual, unmistaken, unaltered, not an error, suchness, the real, true, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, qualified by not changing, and not nonexistent—this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . the feeling that arises from thinking-mind contact  is all a construction, a creation, a narrative, impermanent, unstable, not eternal, qualified by change, not existent, and nonexistent that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the earth, water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness elements, as well as ignorance, volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, and old age and death were to be factual, unmistaken, unaltered, not an error, suchness, the real, true, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, qualified by not changing , and not nonexistent—this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . old age and death is all a construction, a creation, a narrative, impermanent, unstable, not eternal, qualified by change, not existent, and nonexistent that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if suchness were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because suchness is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras  and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element are nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the perfection of giving were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the perfection of giving is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, if the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent,  not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if inner emptiness were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because inner emptiness is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, if . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the four applications of mindfulness were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the four applications of mindfulness are nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass  the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . the path is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the immeasurables, concentrations, and formless absorptions were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the immeasurables, concentrations, and formless absorptions are nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the dharmas of the Gotra level were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the dharmas of the Gotra level are nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world  with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the dharmas of the Aṣṭamaka level were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the dharmas of the Aṣṭamaka level are nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Similarly, if the dharmas of a stream enterer, the dharmas of a once-returner, the dharmas of a non-returner, the dharmas of a worthy one, the dharmas of a pratyekabuddha, the dharmas of a bodhisattva, and, Subhūti, if the dharmas of a buddha were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . the dharmas of a buddha are nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the Gotra level were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the Gotra level is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth.
 “Similarly, if the Aṣṭamaka level, the stream enterer, the once-returner, the non-returner, the worthy one, the pratyekabuddha,  the bodhisattva, and, Subhūti, the buddha were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because . . . the buddha is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. 
 “Subhūti, if the world with its gods, humans, and asuras were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the world with its gods, humans, and asuras is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth.
 “Subhūti, if the bodhisattva great beings’ productions of the thought of awakening, starting from the first production of the thought, up to the site of awakening were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the bodhisattva great beings’ productions of the thought, starting from the first production of the thought, up to the site of awakening are nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth.
 “Subhūti, if the bodhisattva great beings’ vajra-like knowledge  were to be existent, not nonexistent, this Great Vehicle would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the bodhisattva great beings’ vajra-like knowledge is nonexistent, not existent, that this Great Vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth.
 “Subhūti, if the bodhisattva great beings’ vajra-like knowledge were to be existent, not nonexistent, bodhisattva great beings in this Great Vehicle would not, having realized that all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions are nonexistent, gain the knowledge of a knower of all aspects furnished with the best of all aspects and surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth. Subhūti, it is because the bodhisattva great beings’ vajra-like knowledge is nonexistent, not existent, that bodhisattva great beings, having realized that all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions are nonexistent, gain the knowledge of a knower of all aspects furnished with the best of all aspects and surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth.
 “Subhūti, if a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s thirty-two major marks of a great individual were to be existent, not nonexistent, a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s light, beautiful skin color, splendor, and glory would not surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras, and would not beautify it,  illuminate it, light it up, and irradiate it. Subhūti, it is because a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s thirty-two major marks of a great person are nonexistent, not existent, that a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s light, beautiful skin color, splendor, and glory surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras, and beautify it, illuminate it, light it up, and irradiate it.
 “Subhūti, if a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s light were to be existent, not nonexistent, a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s light would not illuminate and pervade as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. Subhūti, it is because a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s light is nonexistent, not existent, that a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s light illuminates and pervades as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River.
 “Subhūti, if a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s voice with sixty special qualities were to be existent, not nonexistent, a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s speech would not be heard in infinite, countless world systems in the ten directions. Subhūti, it is because a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s voice with sixty special qualities is nonexistent, not existent, that a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s speech is heard  in infinite, countless world systems in the ten directions. 
 “Subhūti, if a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s wheel of the Dharma were to be existent, not nonexistent, a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha could not turn the wheel of the Dharma that no followers of a secluded religious life, brahmins, gods, Māras, or Brahmās can in truth turn in the world. Subhūti, it is because a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s wheel of the Dharma is nonexistent, not existent, that a tathāgata, worthy one, perfect complete buddha turns the wheel of the Dharma that no followers of a secluded religious life, brahmins, gods, Māras, or Brahmās can in truth turn in the world. 
 “Subhūti, if beings were to be existent, not nonexistent, those beings for whose sake a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha turns the wheel of the Dharma would not enter complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. Subhūti, it is because beings are nonexistent, not existent, that those beings for whose sake a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha turns the wheel of the Dharma enter, have entered, and will enter complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. 
 “Subhūti, you said, ‘The Great Vehicle is equal to space.’ It is exactly so, Subhūti, it is exactly so!  Subhūti, that vehicle is equal to space. To illustrate, an eastern direction of space does not make itself known, nor does a southern, western, or northern, below or above, or intermediate direction make itself known, and similarly, Subhūti, an eastern direction of the Great Vehicle also does not make itself known, nor does a southern, western, or northern, below or above, or intermediate direction make itself known. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, space is not tall, is not short, is not square, is not spherical, is not even, and is not uneven. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not tall, is not short, is not square, is not spherical, is not even, and is not uneven. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not blue, is not yellow, is not red, is not white, is not reddish brown, is not crystalline, and is not silver colored. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not blue, is not yellow, is not red, is not white, is not reddish brown, is not crystalline, and is not silver colored. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not past, is not future, and is not present. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not past, is not future, and is not present. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space does not decrease, does not increase, and is not reduced. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also does not decrease, does not increase, and is not reduced. Therefore  it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space has no defilement and has no purification. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also has no defilement and has no purification. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not produced, does not stop, is not lasting, is not nonlasting, and does not last and then change into something else. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not produced, does not stop, is not lasting, is not nonlasting, and does not last and then change into something else. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not wholesome, is not unwholesome, is not an object of moral inquiry, and is not not an object of moral inquiry. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not wholesome, is not unwholesome, is not an object of moral inquiry, and is not not an object of moral inquiry. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not seen, not heard, not remembered, and not discerned. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not seen, not heard, not remembered, and not discerned. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not something that should be understood, is not something that should not be understood, is not something that should be thoroughly understood, is not something that should be abandoned, is not something that should be actualized, and is not something that should be cultivated. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not something that should be understood, is not something that should not be understood, is not something that should be thoroughly understood, is not something that should be abandoned, is not something that should be actualized, and is not something that should be cultivated. Therefore,  it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not a maturation and is not subject to maturation. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not a maturation and is not subject to maturation. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not included in the desire realm, is not included in the form realm, and is not included in the formless realm. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not included in the desire realm, is not included in the form realm, and is not included in the formless realm. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not greedy and is not free from greed, is not hateful and is not free from hate, and is not confused and is not free from confusion. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not greedy and is not free from greed, is not hateful and is not free from hate, and is not confused and is not free from confusion. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, there is no first production of the thought of awakening in space, and there is no second, no third, no fourth, no fifth, no sixth, no seventh, no eighth, no ninth, and no tenth production of the thought. Similarly, Subhūti, there is no first production of the thought in the Great Vehicle, and there is no second, no third, no fourth, no fifth, no sixth, no seventh, no eighth, no ninth, and no tenth production of the thought.  Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, there is no Śuklavipaśyanā level in space, and there is no Gotra level, no Aṣṭamaka level, no Darśana level, no Tanū level, no Vītarāga level, and no Kṛtāvin level. Similarly, Subhūti, there is no Śuklavipaśyanā level in the Great Vehicle, and there is no Gotra level, no Aṣṭamaka level, no Darśana level, no Tanū level, no Vītarāga level, and no Kṛtāvin level. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, there is no result of stream enterer in space, and there is no result of once-returner, no result of non-returner, no state of a worthy one, and no pratyekabuddha’s awakening. Similarly, Subhūti, there is no result of stream enterer in the Great Vehicle, and there is no result of once-returner, no result of non-returner, no state of a worthy one, and no pratyekabuddha’s awakening. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, there is no Śrāvaka level, no Pratyekabuddha level, and no Bodhisattva level in space, and neither is there a perfectly complete Buddha level in space. Similarly, Subhūti, there is no Śrāvaka level, no Pratyekabuddha level, and no Bodhisattva level in space, and neither is there a perfectly complete Buddha level in the Great Vehicle. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space does not have form, is not formless, does not show itself, does not not show itself, is not obstructed, is not not obstructed, is not united, and is not separated. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle  also does not have form, is not formless, does not show itself, does not not show itself, is not obstructed, is not not obstructed, is not united, and is not separated. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not permanent, is not impermanent, is not pleasure, is not suffering, does not have a self, is not selfless, is not calm, and is not not calm. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not permanent, is not impermanent, is not pleasure, is not suffering, does not have a self, is not selfless, is not calm, and is not not calm. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not empty, is not not empty, does not have a sign, is not signless, is not wished for, and is not wishless. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not empty, is not not empty, does not have a sign, is not signless, is not wished for, and is not wishless. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not isolated, is not not isolated, is not light, and is not dark. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not isolated, is not not isolated, is not light, and is not dark. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not found and is not apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not found and is not apprehended. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, space is not discourse and is not not discourse.  Similarly, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle also is not discourse and is not not discourse. Therefore, it is said ‘that vehicle is equal to space.’ 
 “Subhūti, where you said, ‘For example, Lord, just as space has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure, the Great Vehicle also, Lord, has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure, and that is why it is called a “Great Vehicle,” ’ it is exactly so, Subhūti, it is exactly so! Subhūti, just as space has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure, the Great Vehicle also, Subhūti, has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? You should know, Subhūti, that because a being is not existent, space is not existent, and you should know that because space is not existent, the Great Vehicle is not existent. It is because of that, Subhūti, that the Great Vehicle, therefore, has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because beings, the infinite, space, and a Great Vehicle  all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that space is infinite because beings are infinite, and you should know that the Great Vehicle is infinite because spaces is infinite. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because beings, the infinite, space, and a Great Vehicle all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that space is not something that can be counted because beings are not something that can be counted, and you should know that the Great Vehicle is not something that can be counted because space is not something that can be counted. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because beings, the countless, space, and a Great Vehicle all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that space is beyond measure because beings are beyond measure, and you should know that the Great Vehicle is beyond measure because space is beyond measure. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because beings, that which is beyond measure, space, and a Great Vehicle all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that the dharma-constituent is nonexistent because beings are nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because the dharma-constituent is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent. You should know that the countless is nonexistent because the infinite is nonexistent, and you should know that that which is beyond measure is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because beings, the dharma-constituent, spaces, the Great Vehicle,  the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that suchness is nonexistent because beings are nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because suchness is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent. You should know that the countless is nonexistent because the infinite is nonexistent. You should know that that which is beyond measure is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because beings, suchness, space, the Great Vehicle, the infinite, the countless, that which is beyond measure, and all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that a living being, a creature, one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who feels, one who knows, and one who sees is nonexistent because a sentient being is nonexistent. You should know that the very limit of reality is nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because the very limit of reality is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure  are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to one who knows and one who sees, the very limit of reality, space, the Great Vehicle, the infinite, the countless, that which is beyond measure, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that the inconceivable element is nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because the inconceivable element is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, that Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that form is nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are nonexistent because form is nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because . . . consciousness is nonexistent.  You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that the eyes are nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are nonexistent because form is nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because the thinking mind is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, that Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that the perfection of giving is nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection  of concentration, and perfection of wisdom are nonexistent because the perfection of giving is nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because . . . the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that inner emptiness is nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is nonexistent because inner emptiness is nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent.  You should know that the right efforts are nonexistent because the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent. You should know that the legs of miraculous power are nonexistent because the right efforts are nonexistent. You should know that the faculties are nonexistent because the legs of miraculous power are nonexistent. You should know that the powers are nonexistent because the faculties are nonexistent. You should know that the seven limbs of awakening are nonexistent because the powers are nonexistent. You should know that the eightfold noble path is nonexistent because the seven limbs of awakening are nonexistent. You should know that the ten powers are nonexistent because the eightfold noble path is nonexistent. You should know that the four fearlessnesses are nonexistent because the ten powers are nonexistent. You should know that the four detailed and thorough knowledges are nonexistent because the four fearlessnesses are nonexistent. You should know that the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are nonexistent because the four detailed and thorough knowledges are nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that the dharmas of the Gotra level are nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that the dharmas of the Aṣṭamaka level, the dharmas of the Darśana level, the dharmas of the Tanū level, the dharmas of the Vītarāga level, and the dharmas of the Kṛtāvin level are nonexistent because the dharmas of the Gotra level  are nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because the dharmas of the Kṛtāvin level are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that a stream enterer is nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that a once-returner is nonexistent because a stream enterer is nonexistent. You should know that a non-returner is nonexistent because a once-returner is nonexistent. You should know that a worthy one is nonexistent because a non-returner is nonexistent. You should know that because a worthy one is nonexistent, space, the Great Vehicle, the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure, up to all dharmas are nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that a buddha is nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that a bodhisattva is nonexistent because a buddha is nonexistent. You  should know that space is nonexistent because a bodhisattva is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should know that a sentient being is nonexistent, up to one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent because a self is nonexistent. You should know that a Śrāvaka Vehicle is nonexistent because . . . one who knows and one who sees is nonexistent. You should know that a pratyekabuddha vehicle is nonexistent because a śrāvaka vehicle is nonexistent. You should know that a buddha vehicle is nonexistent because a pratyekabuddha vehicle is nonexistent. You should know that a knowledge of all aspects is nonexistent because a buddha vehicle is nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because a knowledge of all aspects is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the infinite, the countless, and that which is beyond measure are nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent, and you should know that all dharmas are nonexistent because that which is beyond measure is nonexistent. Therefore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. And why? Subhūti, it is because a self, up to all dharmas all cannot be apprehended. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, just as the element of nirvāṇa has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure, so too, Subhūti,  the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure. By the same token, Subhūti, just as space has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure, so too, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure.
 “Subhūti, where you said, ‘Lord, you cannot apprehend the Great Vehicle coming, cannot apprehend it going, and cannot apprehend it remaining either,’ it is exactly so, Subhūti, it is exactly so! Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the Great Vehicle coming or going, and you cannot apprehend it remaining. And why? Because all dharmas are unmoving. They do not go anywhere, they do not come from anywhere, and they do not remain anywhere. 
 “And why? Because the basic nature of form does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the basic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere. The suchness of form does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere. The intrinsic nature of form does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the intrinsic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere. The mark of form does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the mark of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness  does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, it is because the basic nature of the eyes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the basic nature of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere. Similarly, Subhūti, the suchness, intrinsic nature, and mark of the eyes do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere, and the suchness, intrinsic nature, and mark of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere. 
 “Subhūti, the basic nature, suchness, intrinsic nature, and mark of the earth element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere, and the basic nature, suchness, intrinsic nature, and mark of the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of the dharma-constituent does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness, intrinsic nature, and mark of the dharma-constituent do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of suchness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of suchness, intrinsic nature of suchness, and mark of suchness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti,  the basic nature of the very limit of reality does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of the very limit of reality, intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality, and mark of the very limit of reality do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of the inconceivable element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of the inconceivable element, intrinsic nature of the inconceivable element, and mark of the inconceivable element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of the perfection of giving does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of the perfection of giving, intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving, and mark of the perfection of giving do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere. The basic nature of the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and . . . the suchness of the perfection of wisdom, intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom, and mark of the perfection of wisdom do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere. 
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of the applications of mindfulness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere. Subhūti, the suchness of the applications of mindfulness, intrinsic nature of  the applications of mindfulness, and mark of the applications of mindfulness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere, and the basic nature of the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers of a tathāgata, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, six clairvoyances, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere. Similarly, . . . the suchness of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, intrinsic nature of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and mark of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of awakening does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of awakening, intrinsic nature of awakening, and mark of awakening do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of a buddha does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of a buddha, intrinsic nature of a buddha, and mark of a buddha do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of the compounded does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of the compounded, intrinsic nature of the compounded, and mark of the compounded do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere,  and do not remain anywhere.
 “Subhūti, the basic nature of the uncompounded does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not remain anywhere, and the suchness of the uncompounded, intrinsic nature of the uncompounded, and mark of the uncompounded do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not remain anywhere.
 “Therefore, Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the Great Vehicle coming, cannot apprehend it going, and cannot apprehend it remaining either.
 “Subhūti, where you said, ‘Lord, you cannot apprehend the Great Vehicle’s prior limit, cannot apprehend its later limit, and cannot apprehend its middle either. This is a vehicle equally of the three time periods. That is why “Great Vehicle” is said again and again,’ it is exactly so, Subhūti, it is exactly so! You cannot apprehend the Great Vehicle’s prior limit, cannot apprehend its later limit, and cannot apprehend its middle either. This is a vehicle equally of the three time periods. Therefore ‘Great Vehicle’ is said again and again. 
 “And why? Because, Subhūti, the past time period is empty of the past time period, the future time period is also empty of the future time period, the present time period is also empty of the present time period, the equality of the three time periods is also empty of the equality of the three time periods, the Great Vehicle is also empty of the Great Vehicle, the bodhisattva is also empty of the bodhisattva, and, Subhūti, in emptiness there is no one, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or eight, or nine, or ten, or differentiation. Therefore, this is the vehicle of the bodhisattva great beings equally of the three time periods. 
 “In this  Great Vehicle you cannot apprehend same or not the same, you cannot apprehend greed or free from greed, you cannot apprehend hate or free from hate, you cannot apprehend confusion or free from confusion, you cannot apprehend name or nameless, and similarly you cannot apprehend wholesome or unwholesome, you cannot apprehend with outflows or without outflows, you cannot apprehend basic immorality or not basic immorality, you cannot apprehend blemished or unblemished, you cannot apprehend the ordinary or the extraordinary, you cannot apprehend defilement or purification, and you cannot apprehend saṃsāra or nirvāṇa. In it you also cannot apprehend permanence or impermanence, you also cannot apprehend happiness or suffering, you also cannot apprehend self or no self, and you also cannot apprehend calm or not calm. You also cannot apprehend the desire realm or beyond the desire realm, you also cannot apprehend the form realm or beyond the form realm, and you cannot apprehend the formless realm or beyond the formless realm.
 “And why? Subhūti, it is because you cannot apprehend its intrinsic nature. A past form, Subhūti, is empty of a past form, and similarly a past feeling . . . a past perception . . . past volitional factors . . . and a past consciousness is empty of a past consciousness. A future form, Subhūti, is empty of a future form, and similarly a future feeling . . . a future perception . . . future volitional factors . . . and a future consciousness is empty of a future consciousness. A present form, Subhūti, is empty of a present form, and similarly a present feeling . . . a present perception . . . present volitional factors . . .  and a present consciousness is empty of a present consciousness.
 “And why? Because, Subhūti, you cannot apprehend a past form in emptiness. Given that you cannot apprehend even emptiness because it is empty of emptiness, how could you ever apprehend a past form in emptiness? You cannot apprehend a past feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness in emptiness, either. Given that you cannot apprehend even emptiness because it is empty of emptiness, how could you ever apprehend a past feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness in emptiness? 
 “Similarly, you cannot apprehend a future form in emptiness. Given that you cannot apprehend even emptiness because it is empty of emptiness, how could you ever apprehend a future form in emptiness? You cannot apprehend a future feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness in emptiness, either. Given that you cannot apprehend even emptiness because it is empty of emptiness, how could you ever apprehend a future feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness in emptiness? 
 “Similarly, you cannot apprehend a present form in emptiness. Given that you cannot apprehend even emptiness because it is empty of emptiness, how could you ever apprehend a present form in emptiness? You cannot apprehend a present feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness in emptiness, either. Given that you cannot apprehend even emptiness because it is empty of emptiness, how could you ever apprehend a present feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness in emptiness? 
 “Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the perfection of giving at the prior limit; Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the perfection of giving  at the later limit, and, Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the perfection of giving in the present. Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the perfection of giving in the equality of the three periods of time, either. Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the past period of time in the equality, you cannot apprehend the future period of time in the equality, and you cannot apprehend the present period of time in the equality. Given that you cannot apprehend even equality in the equality, how could you ever apprehend the past, future, or present perfection of giving in the equality? 
 “Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, or perfection of concentration at the prior limit, the later limit, or in the present; Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the perfection of wisdom at the prior limit, the later limit, or in the present, either. . . . You cannot apprehend the perfection of wisdom in the equality of the three periods of time, either. Subhūti, given that you cannot apprehend the past, future, and present periods of time in the equality, and you cannot apprehend even equality in the equality, how could you ever apprehend the past, future, or present perfection of wisdom in the equality? 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the applications of mindfulness at the prior limit, the later limit, or in the middle; you cannot apprehend the applications of mindfulness in the equality of the three periods of time, either. Subhūti, given that you cannot apprehend the past, future, or present periods of time in the equality, and you cannot apprehend even equality in the equality, how could you ever apprehend the past, future, or present applications of mindfulness in the equality? 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, you cannot apprehend the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening,  path, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha at the prior limit, the later limit, or in the middle. You cannot apprehend . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha in the equality of the three periods of time, either. Subhūti, given that you cannot apprehend the past time period, you cannot apprehend the future time period, and you cannot apprehend the present time period in the equality, and you cannot apprehend even equality in the equality, how could you ever apprehend . . . up to the past, future, and present eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha in the equality? 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you cannot apprehend an ordinary person at the prior limit, you cannot apprehend an ordinary person at the later limit, and you cannot apprehend an ordinary person in the present. You cannot apprehend an ordinary person in the equality of the three periods of time, either. And why? Subhūti, it is because a being cannot be found. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you cannot apprehend a śrāvaka at the prior limit, you cannot apprehend a pratyekabuddha or a bodhisattva at the prior limit, and you cannot apprehend a tathāgata at the prior limit. . . . You cannot apprehend a tathāgata at the later limit, and you cannot apprehend a tathāgata in the present. You cannot apprehend a tathāgata in the equality of the three periods of time, either. And why? Subhūti, it is because a tathāgata cannot be found. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom like that, training in the equality of the three periods of time like that, should complete the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “This, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle named equally of the three time periods of the bodhisattva great beings, standing in which bodhisattva great beings surpass  the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Excellent, Lord, it is excellent, this eloquent statement you have made, Lord, that it is the Great Vehicle named equally of the three time periods of the bodhisattva great beings. Lord, past bodhisattva great beings, having trained in this Great Vehicle, gained the knowledge of all aspects. Lord, future bodhisattva great beings will also train in this Great Vehicle and gain the knowledge of all aspects. And, Lord, infinite, countless bodhisattva great beings beyond measure, presently in infinite, countless world systems beyond measure in the ten directions, are training in this Great Vehicle and are gaining the knowledge of all aspects. Therefore, Lord, it is the Great Vehicle of the bodhisattva great beings, because it is the vehicle called equally of the three time periods.”
 Venerable Subhūti having spoken thus, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so. It is just as you say. Past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas also train in this Great Vehicle and gained, will gain, and are gaining the knowledge of all aspects.”
This was the nineteenth chapter, “Surpassing,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 20: Not Two
Then venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra said to the Lord, “Lord, tasked with the perfection of wisdom by the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha, this elder Subhūti thinks he has to give instruction in the Great Vehicle.”
 Venerable Subhūti then said to the Lord, “Let it not be the case, Lord, that I am giving instruction in the Great Vehicle, having violated the perfection of wisdom.”
 “No, you have not,” replied the Lord. “You are giving instruction in the Great Vehicle in harmony with the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because, Subhūti, śrāvaka dharmas, pratyekabuddha dharmas, bodhisattva dharmas, or buddha dharmas—or any wholesome dharmas, whatever they are—they all come together and stream into the perfection of wisdom.”
 Subhūti then asked, “Lord, what are the wholesome dharmas on the side of awakening in the perfection of wisdom in which śrāvaka dharmas, pratyekabuddha dharmas, bodhisattva dharmas, and buddha dharmas all come together, and into which they stream?”
 The Lord replied, “The four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; emptiness meditative stabilization, signless meditative stabilization, and wishless meditative stabilization; the four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions;  the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and constant dwelling in the natural state not robbed of mindfulness and in equanimity—these, Subhūti, are the wholesome dharmas on the side of awakening in the perfection of wisdom in which śrāvaka dharmas, pratyekabuddha dharmas, bodhisattva dharmas, and buddha dharmas all come together, and into which they stream.
 “Subhūti, whatever the dharma—the Great Vehicle, perfection of wisdom, perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving; form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; eyes, a form, eye consciousness, eye contact, feeling from the condition of eye contact; ears . . . nose . . . tongue . . . body . . . and thinking mind, a dharma, thinking-mind consciousness, thinking-mind contact, and the feeling from the condition of thinking-mind contact; the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power,  faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, path, tathāgata powers, fearlessnesses, and detailed and thorough knowledges; emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness; compounded dharmas and uncompounded dharmas; suffering, origination, cessation, and path; the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm; from inner emptiness up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; the meditative stabilizations, dhāraṇī gateways, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha, the tathāgata, the Dharma and Vinaya spoken by the tathāgata, the dharma-constituent, suchness, very limit of reality, the inconceivable element, and nirvāṇa—all these dharmas are not conjoined, are not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. In this way, Subhūti, you give instruction in the Great Vehicle in accord with the perfection of wisdom. 
 “And why? Because, Subhūti, it is not that the Great Vehicle is one thing and the perfection of wisdom another, or the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving one thing and the Great Vehicle another, or the applications of mindfulness one thing and the Great Vehicle another; so the Great Vehicle and those applications  of mindfulness are not two, nor are they divided, up to it is not that the Great Vehicle is one thing and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha another; so the Great Vehicle and those distinct attributes of a buddha are not two, nor are they divided. It is because of this, Subhūti, that by giving instruction in the Great Vehicle you have given instruction in the perfection of wisdom, and by giving instruction in the perfection of wisdom you have given instruction in the Great Vehicle.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “But still, Lord, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the later limit, and one does not assert a bodhisattva in the middle. One has to know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of form, and one has to know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. Lord, even such an idea as ‘form is a bodhisattva’ does not exist and is not found; even such ideas as ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is a bodhisattva’ do not exist and are not found. So, Lord, I, who thus do not see and do not find a bodhisattva great being as anyone at all in any way at all—to which bodhisattva great being will I give advice and instruction in which perfection of wisdom? 
 “You say this, Lord, that is, ‘bodhisattva.’ It is just a word. To illustrate, Lord, you say ‘self’ again and again, but it absolutely has not come into being.  Similarly, Lord, you say ‘bodhisattva’ again and again, but a bodhisattva absolutely has not come into being. Lord, given that all phenomena thus have no intrinsic nature, what is that form that has come into being? What is that feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness that has come into being? Lord, what has not come into being is not form, and what has not come into being is not feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Lord, you cannot apprehend those bodhisattva great beings who would practice for awakening other than those who have not come into being, so does what has not come into being give advice and instruction in a perfection of wisdom that has not come into being?
 “Lord, one should know that when the mind of a bodhisattva given such instruction is not cowed, does not tense up, does not experience regret, and does not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified, then that bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom.”
 Śāriputra then asked venerable Subhūti, “Why, Venerable Subhūti, does one not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, does one not assert a bodhisattva at the later limit, and does one not assert a bodhisattva in the middle? Why, Venerable Subhūti, should one know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of form, and why should one know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness? Why, Venerable Subhūti, does even such an idea as ‘a bodhisattva is form’ not exist and why is it not found,  and why do even such ideas as ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is a bodhisattva’ not exist and why are they not found? Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, ‘So Lord, I, who thus do not see and do not find a bodhisattva great being as anyone at all in any way at all—to which bodhisattva great being will I give advice and instruction in which perfection of wisdom?’ Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you go so far as to say, ‘You say this, Lord, that is, “bodhisattva.” It is just a word’? Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, ‘For example, Lord, you say “self” again and again, but it absolutely has not come into being. Similarly, Lord, you say “bodhisattva” again and again, but a bodhisattva absolutely has not come into being’? Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, ‘Lord, given that all dharmas thus are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, what is that form that has come into being? What is that feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness that has come into being? Lord, what has not come into being is not form, and what has not come into being is not feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness’? Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, ‘Lord, does what has not come into being give advice and instruction in a perfection of wisdom that has not come into being?’ Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, ‘Lord, you cannot apprehend bodhisattva great beings  who would practice for awakening other than those who have not come into being’? And why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, ‘Lord, one should know that when the mind of a bodhisattva given such instruction is not cowed, does not tense up, does not experience regret, and does not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified, then that bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom’?”
 Subhūti then replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, because beings are nonexistent, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Venerable Śāriputra, because beings are empty one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Venerable Śāriputra, because beings are isolated one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Venerable Śāriputra, because beings are nonexistent things one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because form is nonexistent one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Venerable Śāriputra, because form is empty, form is isolated, and form has no intrinsic nature, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Similarly, because feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and because consciousness is nonexistent, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Because consciousness is empty, consciousness is isolated, and consciousness has no intrinsic nature, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because the perfection of giving is nonexistent, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Venerable Śāriputra, because the perfection of giving is empty, the perfection of giving is isolated, and the perfection of giving has no intrinsic nature, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Similarly, because the perfection of morality . . .  the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and because the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit. Because the perfection of wisdom is empty, the perfection of wisdom is isolated, and the perfection of wisdom has no intrinsic nature, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit.
 “And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because you cannot apprehend a prior limit, a later limit, or a middle in emptiness; emptiness is not one thing, a bodhisattva another, and a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle another, so, Venerable Śāriputra, therefore, all these—emptiness, a bodhisattva, a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle—are not two, nor are they divided.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, nonexistence is not one thing, emptiness another, isolation another, having no intrinsic nature another, a bodhisattva another, the perfection of giving another, the perfection of morality another, the perfection of patience another, the perfection of perseverance another, the perfection of concentration another, the perfection of wisdom another, and a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle another, so, Venerable Śāriputra, therefore, all these—nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, having no intrinsic nature, the six perfections, a bodhisattva,  a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle—are not two, nor are they divided.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle.
 “And why? Venerable Śāriputra because inner emptiness is nonexistent, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, up to because emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is nonexistent, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle. 
 “And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because one does apprehend a prior limit, a later limit, or a middle in the nonexistence of inner emptiness, the emptiness of inner emptiness, or the isolation of inner emptiness, or any intrinsic nature of inner emptiness, up to it is because they cannot apprehend a prior limit, a later limit, or a middle in the nonexistence of emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the emptiness of emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, or the isolation of emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, or any intrinsic nature of emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, and no intrinsic nature of inner emptiness is not one thing, up to the nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, and no intrinsic nature of emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not another, a bodhisattva another, and a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle another, so, Venerable Śāriputra, therefore, all these—the nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, and no intrinsic nature of inner emptiness, up to the nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, and no intrinsic nature of emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, a bodhisattva, a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle—are not two, nor are they divided. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, because the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle; because the applications of mindfulness are empty, the applications of mindfulness are isolated, and the applications of mindfulness have no intrinsic nature, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle either.
 “Similarly, because the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path, powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha are nonexistent one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle. Similarly, connect this with because the distinct attributes of a buddha are empty, the distinct attributes of a buddha are isolated, and the distinct attributes of a buddha have no intrinsic nature, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle.
 “And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because one cannot apprehend a prior limit, a later limit, or a middle in nonexistence, in emptiness, in isolation, or in no intrinsic nature. Nonexistence is not one thing, emptiness another, isolation another, not having an intrinsic nature another, the applications of mindfulness another, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha another, and a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle another, so, Venerable Śāriputra, therefore, all these—the nonexistence,  emptiness, isolation, and no intrinsic nature of the applications of mindfulness, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha, a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle—are not two, nor are they divided. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, because all the meditative stabilizations are nonexistent . . . because all the dhāraṇī gateways are nonexistent . . . because the dharma-constituent is nonexistent . . . because suchness is nonexistent . . . and because the very limit of reality is nonexistent, the very limit of reality is empty, the very limit of reality is isolated, and the very limit of reality has no intrinsic nature, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle. 
 “And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because one does apprehend a prior limit, a later limit, or a middle in the nonexistence of the meditative stabilizations, in the nonexistence of the very limit of reality, up to in the nonexistence of the absence of an intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality. Venerable Śāriputra, nonexistence is not one thing, emptiness another, isolation another, not having an intrinsic nature another, a bodhisattva another, up to the very limit of reality another, and a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle another, so, Venerable Śāriputra, therefore, as anything at all in any way at all, these—nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, and no intrinsic nature, meditative stabilization, up to the very limit of reality, a bodhisattva, a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle—are not two, nor are they divided.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra,  because śrāvakas are nonexistent, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle; because śrāvakas are empty, isolated, and have no intrinsic nature, one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle; and because pratyekabuddhas are nonexistent, bodhisattvas are nonexistent, the knowledge of all aspects is nonexistent, the knowledge of all aspects is empty, the knowledge of all aspects is isolated, and the knowledge of all aspects has no intrinsic nature, they do not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle. 
 “And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because one cannot apprehend a prior limit, a later limit, or a middle in nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, and no intrinsic nature. Nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, and not having an intrinsic nature are not one thing, and bodhisattvas, śrāvakas, and pratyekabuddhas another, the knowledge of all aspects another, and a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle another, so, Venerable Śāriputra, therefore, all these—the nonexistence, emptiness, isolation, and no intrinsic nature, śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas—they are not two, nor are they divided. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations one does not assert a bodhisattva at the prior limit, at the later limit, or in the middle.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why, Venerable Subhūti, should one know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of form, and why should one know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness?’—Venerable Śāriputra, form is equal to space, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are equal to space. And why? To illustrate, Venerable Śāriputra, one cannot apprehend a limit, a middle, or an end in space, but still space works as a conventional label. Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, because form is empty, one cannot apprehend the prior limit, one cannot apprehend the later limit, and one cannot apprehend the middle of form, because one cannot apprehend the end or the middle of emptiness. Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are empty one cannot apprehend the prior limit, one cannot apprehend the later limit, and one cannot apprehend the middle of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, because one cannot apprehend the end or the middle of emptiness.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations one should know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of form, and should know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness.
 “Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, the constituents, sense fields, applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path, and the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha, are equal to space. 
 “And why? To illustrate, Venerable Śāriputra, because the limitless is boundless one cannot apprehend an end or a middle of space, but still space works as a conventional label. Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, because of the emptiness of . . . up to the buddhadharmas,  one cannot apprehend the end or the middle of the buddhadharmas, because one cannot apprehend the end or the middle of emptiness.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations one should know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of the buddhadharmas.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why, Venerable Subhūti, does even such an idea as “a bodhisattva is form” not exist and why is it not found, and why does even such an idea as “feeling . . . ,” “perception . . . ,” “volitional factors . . . ,” and “consciousness is a bodhisattva” not exist and why is it not found?’—Venerable Śāriputra, form is empty of form. Venerable Śāriputra, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of consciousness. 
 “And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, in emptiness form does not exist and is not found; in emptiness a bodhisattva does not exist and is not found. Similarly, in emptiness feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not exist and are not found. In emptiness a bodhisattva does not exist and is not found.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, even such an idea as ‘a bodhisattva is form’ does not exist and is not found, and even such an idea as ‘a bodhisattva is feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness’ does not exist and is not found.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of giving is empty of the perfection of giving. Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom. 
 “And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, in emptiness the perfection of wisdom  does not exist and is not found; in emptiness a bodhisattva does not exist and is not found. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, inner emptiness is empty of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness. The right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . and the path; . . . and the ten powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . and the distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of the distinct attributes of a buddha. The dharma-constituent is empty of the dharma-constituent, suchness is empty of suchness, the very limit of reality is empty of the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element is empty of the inconceivable element. Meditative stabilization is empty of meditative stabilization, the dhāraṇī gateways are empty of the dhāraṇī gateways, all-knowledge is empty of all-knowledge, the knowledge of path aspects is empty of the knowledge of path aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects is empty of the knowledge of all aspects. The Śrāvaka Vehicle is empty of the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle is empty of the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the Buddha Vehicle is empty of the Buddha Vehicle. Śrāvakas are empty of śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas are empty of pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas are empty of bodhisattvas, and tathāgatas are empty of tathāgatas. Venerable Śāriputra, in the emptiness of the tathāgata, form does not exist and is not found, and in the emptiness of the tathāgata, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not exist and are not found. 
 “Venerable  Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations even such an idea as ‘a bodhisattva is form’ does not exist and is not found, and even such an idea as ‘a bodhisattva is feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness’ does not exist and is not found.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, “So Lord, I, who thus do not see and do not find a bodhisattva great being as anyone at all in any way at all—to which bodhisattva great being will I give advice and instruction in which perfection of wisdom?” ’—Venerable Śāriputra, form is not found in form, form is not found in feeling; feeling is not found in feeling, feeling is not found in form. Form and feeling are not found in perception, perception is not found in perception, and perception is not found in form or feeling. Volitional factors do not exist and are not found in perception. Volitional factors do not exist and are not found in volitional factors. Perception does not exist and is not found in volitional factors. Consciousness does not exist and is not found in volitional factors; volitional factors do not exist and are not found in consciousness. Form, feeling, perception, and volitional factors do not exist and are not found in consciousness. Consciousness does not exist and is not found in form, feeling, perception, or volitional factors. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, the eyes do not exist and are not found in the eyes; the eyes do not exist and are not found in the ears. The ears do not exist  and are not found in the eyes; the ears do not exist and are not found in the ears. The ears do not exist and are not found in the nose. The nose does not exist and is not found in the nose. The nose does not exist and is not found in the eyes or ears. The nose does not exist and is not found in the tongue. The tongue does not exist and is not found in the tongue. The tongue does not exist and is not found in the eyes, ears, or nose. The tongue does not exist and is not found in the body. The body does not exist and is not found in the body. The body does not exist and is not found in the eyes, ears, nose, or tongue. The body does not exist and is not found in the thinking mind. The thinking mind does not exist and is not found in the thinking mind. The thinking mind does not exist and is not found in the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, or body.
 “A form does not exist and is not found in a form. A form does not exist and is not found in a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, or a dharma. A sound does not exist and is not found in a sound; a sound does not exist and is not found in the others. Similarly, a smell does not exist and is not found in a smell or in the others, a taste does not exist and is not found in a taste or in the others, a feeling does not exist and is not found in a feeling or in the others, and a dharma does not exist and is not found in a dharma or in the others.
 “Eye consciousness does not exist and is not found in eye consciousness, the others also do not exist and are not found in it, and it also does not exist and is not found in the others. Ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, and thinking-mind consciousness are similar: thinking-mind consciousness does not exist and is not found in thinking-mind consciousness, the others also do not exist and are not found in it, and it also does not exist and is not found in the others.
 “Eye contact does not exist and is not found in eye contact, it  also does not exist and is not found in the others, and the others also do not exist and are not found in it. Ear contact, nose contact, tongue contact, body contact, and thinking-mind contact are similar: thinking-mind contact does not exist and is not found in thinking-mind contact, and the other contacts also do not exist and are not found in thinking-mind contact. 
 “Feeling from the condition of eye contact does not exist and is not found in feeling from the condition of eye contact, and the others also do not exist and are not found in it, nor the others in the others. Feeling from the condition of ear contact . . . nose contact . . . tongue contact . . . body contact . . . and feeling from the condition of thinking-mind contact does not exist and is not found in feeling from the condition of thinking-mind contact, and the others also do not exist and are not found in it, nor the others in the others.
 “The applications of mindfulness do not exist and are not found in the applications of mindfulness, and similarly the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path, and the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha do not exist and are not found in the buddhadharmas. The four detailed and thorough knowledges do not exist and are not found in the four detailed and thorough knowledges. The buddhadharmas do not exist and are not found in the four detailed and thorough knowledges. The four detailed and thorough knowledges do not exist and are not found in the buddhadharmas. All dharmas do not exist and are not found in all dharmas. All dharmas do not exist and are not found in the buddhadharmas.
 “Inner emptiness does not exist and is not found in inner emptiness.  Inner emptiness does not exist and is not found in . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not exist and is not found in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not exist and is not found in . . . up to inner emptiness.
 “Meditative stabilization does not exist and is not found in meditative stabilization. Meditative stabilization does not exist and is not found in the dhāraṇīs. Dhāraṇī does not exist and is not found in dhāraṇī. Dhāraṇī does not exist and is not found in meditative stabilization.
 “The level of an ordinary person does not exist and is not found in the level of an ordinary person, and the Gotra level . . . the Aṣṭamaka level . . . the Darśana level . . . the Vītarāga level . . . the Tanū level . . . the Kṛtāvin level . . . the Pratyekabuddha level . . . the Bodhisattva level . . . the Tathāgata level . . . and the level of the knowledge of all aspects does not exist and is not found in the level of the knowledge of all aspects. Similarly, a stream enterer does not exist and is not found in a stream enterer; a once-returner . . . a non-returner . . . a worthy one . . . and a pratyekabuddha does not exist and is not found in a pratyekabuddha; a bodhisattva . . . ; and a perfectly complete buddha does not exist and is not found in a perfectly complete buddha.
 “A bodhisattva does not exist and is not found in the perfection of wisdom. The perfection of wisdom also does not exist and is not found in the perfection of wisdom. Advice and instruction do not exist and are not found in the perfection of wisdom. Advice and instruction do not exist and are not found in advice and instruction. A bodhisattva does not exist and is not found in advice and instruction. Therefore, Venerable Śāriputra, given that all dharmas do not exist and are not found, a bodhisattva also  does not exist and is not found, that is, cannot be pointed out.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, “You say this, Lord, that is, ‘bodhisattva.’ It is just a word”?’—Venerable Śāriputra, this—that is, ‘bodhisattva’—is designated by a name plucked out of thin air, so, Venerable Śāriputra, one says ‘this, that is, “bodhisattva,” is just a word.’ Because, Venerable Śāriputra, the words for all dharmas do not come from anywhere in the ten directions and do not go anywhere, so too the word for a bodhisattva does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere, because these—that is, ‘form,’ ‘feeling,’ ‘perception,’ ‘volitional factors,’ and ‘consciousness’—are designated by names plucked out of thin air. That name is not form, nor is it feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness. And why? Because a name is empty of the intrinsic nature of a name. That which is empty is not the name, so, Venerable Śāriputra, one says ‘this, that is, “bodhisattva,” is just a word.’
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, this ‘perfection of giving’ is just words, and in those words there is no perfection of giving, and in that perfection of giving also there are no words. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, both those words and that perfection of giving do not exist and cannot be found. Therefore this ‘bodhisattva’ is simply just a word.
 “Similarly, this ‘perfection of morality’ . . . ‘perfection of patience’ . . . ‘perfection of perseverance’ . . . ‘perfection of concentration’ . . . and ‘perfection of wisdom,’ is just  words, and in those words there is no perfection of wisdom and in that perfection of wisdom there is also no word. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, both those words and that perfection of wisdom do not exist and cannot be found. Therefore, Venerable Śāriputra, this ‘bodhisattva’ is a name plucked out of thin air, so this ‘bodhisattva’ is simply just a word.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, ‘inner emptiness’ up to ‘emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature’ is just words. Other than inner emptiness there are no words, and in those words there is no inner emptiness, up to other than the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature there are no words, and in those words there is no emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, both those words and that inner emptiness, up to that emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature do not exist and cannot be found. Therefore, Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, this ‘bodhisattva’ is simply just a word.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, this ‘applications of mindfulness’ is a name plucked out of thin air. Other than applications of mindfulness there are no words, and in those words there are no applications of mindfulness. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, both those words and those applications of mindfulness do not exist and cannot be found. Similarly, these ‘right efforts,’ ‘legs of miraculous power,’ ‘faculties,’ ‘powers,’ ‘limbs of awakening,’ ‘eightfold noble path,’ ‘ten powers,’ ‘four fearlessnesses,’ ‘four detailed and thorough knowledges,’ and ‘eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha’  are names plucked out of thin air. Other than buddhadharmas there are no words, and in those words there are no buddhadharmas. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, both those words and those buddhadharmas do not exist and cannot be found. 
 “Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, these—‘meditative stabilization,’ ‘dhāraṇī gateways,’ up to ‘knowledge of all aspects’—are names plucked out of thin air. Other than knowledge of all aspects there are no words, and in those words there is also no knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, both those words and up to that knowledge of all aspects do not exist and cannot be found. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why, Venerable Subhūti, do you say, “For example, Lord, you say ‘self’ again and again, but it has absolutely not come into being”?’—Venerable Śāriputra, given that a self absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being? Venerable Śāriputra, given that a being, a living being, a creature, one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who feels, one who knows, and one who sees absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could someone like that have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that form absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being? And given that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness absolutely do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being? 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that the eyes absolutely do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being? Similarly,  given that the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind absolutely do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that a form absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being? Similarly, given that a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that eye consciousness absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being? And given that ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind consciousness do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that eye contact absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being? And given that ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that feeling from the condition of eye contact absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being? And given that feelings from the condition of ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that the perfection of giving absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being? And given that the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that inner emptiness absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being? And given that up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature do not exist  and are not found, how could they have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that the applications of mindfulness absolutely do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being? And given that the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, given that the meditative stabilizations and dhāraṇī gateways absolutely do not exist and are not found, how could they have ever come into being? And given that a śrāvaka absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could someone like that have ever come into being? And given that a pratyekabuddha absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could someone like that have ever come into being? And given that a bodhisattva absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could someone like that have ever come into being? And given that a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could someone like that have ever come into being?
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, even though one says ‘self’ again and again, a self has absolutely not come into being.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why do you say, “Given that all dharmas thus are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature”?’—Venerable Śāriputra, exactly so! And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, an intrinsic nature arisen from a union does not exist.”
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what does not have an intrinsic nature arisen from a union?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “form has no intrinsic nature arisen  from a union; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness have no intrinsic nature arisen from a union. Venerable Śāriputra, the eyes have no intrinsic nature arisen from a union; similarly, the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind have no intrinsic nature arisen from a union. Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma; eye consciousness, and ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind consciousness; eye contact, and ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact; feeling from the condition of eye contact; and feeling from the condition of ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact have no intrinsic nature arisen from a union. Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of giving has no intrinsic nature arisen from a union. The perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom have no intrinsic nature arisen from a union. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, all dharmas are impermanent, but not because anything disappears.” 
 “What are those dharmas that are impermanent even though nothing disappears?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, form is impermanent, but not because anything disappears. Venerable Śāriputra, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are impermanent, but not because anything disappears. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because that which is impermanent has come to an end, is a nonexistent thing. Similarly, all dharmas  are suffering, selfless, calm, empty, signless, and wishless, but not because anything disappears. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because that which is wishless has come to an end, is a nonexistent thing. Similarly, all dharmas are wholesome, not a basic immorality, without outflows, without afflictions, extraordinary, purified, and uncompounded, but not because anything disappears. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because that which is uncompounded has come to an end, is a nonexistent thing. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, all dharmas have no intrinsic nature, but not because anything disappears. 
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, all dharmas are neither unmoved nor destroyed.”
 “Why are dharmas neither unmoved nor destroyed?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, form is neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is its basic nature. Venerable Śāriputra, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are neither unmoved nor destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature. Similarly, wholesome and unwholesome, basic immorality and not basic immorality, with outflows and without outflows, with afflictions and without afflictions, ordinary and extraordinary, compounded and uncompounded, defiled and purified, and saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are neither unmoved nor  destroyed. And why? Because that is their basic nature.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, even though nothing disappears. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why do you say, “What is that form that has come into being? What is that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness that has come into being?” ’—Venerable Śāriputra, it is because form has not occasioned anything, because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness have not occasioned anything. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because there is nothing that occasions them. Venerable Śāriputra, the eyes do not occasion anything. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because there is nothing that occasions them. Venerable Śāriputra, similarly, the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind have not occasioned anything. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because there is nothing that occasions them. Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and a dharma have not occasioned anything. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because someone to enact them does not exist. Up to, all dharmas have not occasioned anything. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because nothing that occasions them is apprehended. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, ‘form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness have not come into being.’
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why do you say, “What has not come into being is not form, and what has not come into being is not feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness?” ’—Venerable  Śāriputra, exactly so, exactly so! Because, Venerable Śāriputra, form is empty of a basic nature, and what is empty of a basic nature does not arise and does not pass away, and in what does not arise and does not pass away there is no transformation. Similarly, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are empty of a basic nature, and what is empty of a basic nature does not arise and does not pass away, and in what does not arise and does not pass away there is no transformation, up to all dharmas are empty of a basic nature, and what are empty of a basic nature do not arise and do not pass away, and in what do not arise and do not pass away there is no transformation. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, what has not come into being is not form, and what has not come into being is not feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why do you say, “Does what has not come into being give advice and instruction in a perfection of wisdom that has not come into being?” ’—Venerable Śāriputra, because what has not come into being is the perfection of wisdom, and the perfection of wisdom is what has not come into being, therefore, what has not come into being and the perfection of wisdom are not two, nor are they divided. Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, I said, ‘Does what has not come into being give advice and instruction in a perfection of wisdom that has not come into being?’ 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘Why do you say, “They cannot apprehend a bodhisattva great being who would practice for awakening other than one who has not come into being”?’—Venerable Śāriputra,  because bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see ‘what has not come into being as one thing and a bodhisattva as another,’ what has not come into being and the bodhisattva are not two, nor are they divided. They do not see form other than what has not come into being, and they do not see feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness other than what has not come into being; therefore, what has not come into being and form are not two, nor are they divided, and therefore, what has not come into being and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not two, nor are they divided. Similarly, up to they do not see all dharmas other than what has not come into being, and therefore, what has not come into being and all dharmas are not two, nor are they divided. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, one cannot apprehend a bodhisattva great being who would practice for awakening other than one who has not come into being. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘And why do you say, “One should know that when the mind of a bodhisattva great being given such instruction is not cowed, does not tense up, does not experience regret, and does not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified, then that bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom”?’—Venerable Śāriputra, it is because bodhisattva great beings see all dharmas not stirring, and they see them like a dream,  like an illusion, like a mirage, like an echo, like an apparition, like a reflection in the mirror, and like a magical creation. Because of this one of many explanations, Venerable Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom hear this they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “When bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom investigate those dharmas like that they do not then assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on form, and neither do they label anything ‘this is form’; they also do not assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness, and neither do they label anything ‘this is consciousness.’ Similarly, they do not then assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on the eyes, and neither do they label anything ‘these are the eyes’; and similarly, they do not then assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on the ears . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . or the thinking mind, and neither do they label anything ‘this is the thinking mind.’ Similarly, they do not then assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on the perfection of giving, and neither do they label anything ‘this is the perfection of giving’; and similarly, they do not then assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . or the perfection of wisdom,  and neither do they label anything ‘this is the perfection of wisdom.’ They do not then assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on inner emptiness, and neither do they label anything ‘this is inner emptiness’; and similarly they do not then assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and neither do they label anything ‘this is the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.’
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on the applications of mindfulness, and neither do they label anything ‘these are the applications of mindfulness.’ Similarly, bodhisattvas do not then assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on the right efforts . . . , the legs of miraculous power . . . , the faculties . . . , the powers . . . , the limbs of awakening . . . , the eightfold noble path . . . , the ten powers . . . , the fearlessnesses . . . , the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and neither do they label anything ‘these are the buddhadharmas.’
 “Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not assert, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on all the meditative stabilization gateways and all the dhāraṇī gateways, and neither do they label anything ‘these are the meditative stabilization and dhāraṇī gateways.’ 
 “And why? Lord, it is because bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see form; similarly, because they do not see the aggregates, constituents, or sense fields,  they do not see the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, they do not see the perfections, up to and they do not see the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha or the knowledge of all aspects.
 “And why? Lord, it is because form is not produced, and the nonproduction of form is not form. Therefore, form and the nonproduction of form are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because that nonproduction is not one, nor is it many.
 “The nonproduction of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not consciousness; the nonproduction of the eyes is not the eyes; the nonproduction of the ears . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . and the thinking mind is not the thinking mind; the nonproduction of the perfection of giving is not the perfection of giving; and the nonproduction of the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom. Therefore, the perfection of wisdom and nonproduction are not two, nor are they divided. 
 “The nonproduction of inner emptiness is not inner emptiness, up to the nonproduction of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Therefore,  the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature and nonproduction are not two, nor are they divided.
 “Lord, the nonproduction of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness. Therefore, the applications of mindfulness and nonproduction are not two, nor are they divided. Similarly, the nonproduction of the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . the path . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the clairvoyances . . . the ten powers . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha is not the buddhadharmas. Therefore, the buddhadharmas and nonproduction are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Because those nonproductions of the buddhadharmas are not the buddhadharmas. 
 “Lord, it is because suchness is not produced, and the nonproduction of suchness is not suchness. Therefore, suchness and nonproduction are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because nonproduction is not one, nor is it many. For that reason, the nonproduction of suchness is not suchness. The nonproduction of unmistaken suchness . . . unaltered suchness . . . the true nature of dharmas . . . the dharma-constituent . . . the establishment of dharmas . . . the certification of dharmas . . . the very limit of reality . . . and  the inconceivable element is not the inconceivable element. And why? Because the inconceivable element and nonproduction are not two, nor are they divided. 
 “Lord, the nonproduction of awakening . . . and the knowledge of all aspects is not the knowledge of all aspects. Therefore, the knowledge of all aspects and nonproduction are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because nonproduction is not one, nor is it many. For that reason, the knowledge of all aspects and nonproduction are not two, nor are they divided. 
 “Lord, it is because form is impermanent, so a decrease in form is not form. A decrease in feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not consciousness. Therefore, the aggregates and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because a decrease is not one, nor is it many. A decrease in the constituents and sense fields is not the constituents and sense fields. Therefore, the constituents and sense fields and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided. 
 “Lord, a decrease in the perfection of giving is not the perfection of giving, so the perfection of giving and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided.  Similarly, a decrease in the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom, so the perfection of wisdom and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Because a decrease is not one, nor is it many. Therefore, a decrease in the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Lord, a decrease in inner emptiness is not inner emptiness, so inner emptiness and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because a decrease is not one, nor is it many. Therefore, a decrease in inner emptiness is not inner emptiness. Similarly, up to a decrease in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, so the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because a decrease is not one, nor is it many. Therefore, a decrease in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.
 “Lord, a decrease in the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness, so the applications of mindfulness and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because  a decrease is not one, nor is it many. Therefore, a decrease in the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness. A decrease in the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . and the eightfold noble path is not the path, so the path and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because a decrease is not one, nor is it many. Therefore, a decrease in the path is not the path. Similarly, up to a decrease in the clairvoyances . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . the ten powers . . . and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha is not the distinct attributes of a buddha, so the distinct attributes of a buddha and a decrease are not two, nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because a decrease is not one, nor is it many. Therefore, a decrease in the distinct attributes of a buddha is not the distinct attributes of a buddha.
 “Lord, anything called form is counted as not two. Similarly, anything called feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is counted as not two, up to anything called the knowledge of all aspects is counted as not two.” 
This was the twentieth chapter, “Not Two,”  of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 21: Subhūti
Then venerable Śāriputra inquired of venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom investigate these dharmas? And, Venerable Subhūti, what is a bodhisattva? What is the perfection of wisdom? What is it to investigate?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “in regard to what you asked—‘What is a bodhisattva?’—they are called bodhisattvas because awakening is itself their state of being. And with that awakening they know the aspects of dharmas but they do not settle down on those dharmas. 
 “Of which dharmas do they know the aspects? They know the aspects of form but they do not settle down on them, and they know the aspects of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness but they do not settle down on them. Similarly, they know the aspects of the constituents, sense fields, dependent originations, and thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening but they do not settle down on them. They know the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha but they do not settle down on them.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, what are the aspects of all dharmas?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “whatever the attributes, tokens, and signs on account of which dharmas are formulated—that is to say, the attributes, tokens, and signs on account of which they are formulated as compounded and uncompounded dharmas, or as forms, sounds, smells, tastes,  feelings, or dharmas, or as inner and outer dharmas—those are called the aspects of dharmas.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘What is the perfection of wisdom?’—Venerable Śāriputra, that which is called perfection of wisdom has gone far off, hence it is called wisdom gone to the other side.
 “From what has it gone far off? Venerable Śāriputra, it has gone far off from the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, and dependent origination; it has gone far off from all defilement and all that is riddled with views; and it has gone far off from the six forms of life—therefore it is said it has gone far off. It has gone far off from the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration—therefore it is said it has gone far off. It has gone far off from inner emptiness, up to emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature—therefore it is said it has gone far off. It has gone far off from the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path—therefore it is said it has gone far off. It has gone far off from the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—therefore it is said it has gone far off, up to it has gone far off from the knowledge of all aspects, therefore it is said it has gone far off. Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, it is said that this perfection of wisdom  has gone far off.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in regard to what you asked—‘What is it to investigate?’—Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not investigate ‘form is permanent’ or ‘impermanent,’ do not investigate ‘form is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ do not investigate ‘form is self’ or ‘no self,’ do not investigate ‘form is calm’ or ‘not calm,’ do not investigate ‘form is empty’ or ‘not empty,’ do not investigate ‘form has a sign’ or ‘is signless,’ do not investigate ‘form is wished for’ or ‘is wishless,’ and do not investigate ‘form is isolated’ or ‘not isolated.’ Similarly, they do not investigate ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is permanent’ or ‘impermanent,’ they do not investigate ‘consciousness is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ do not investigate ‘consciousness is self’ or ‘no self,’ do not investigate ‘consciousness is calm’ or ‘not calm,’ do not investigate ‘consciousness is empty’ or ‘not empty,’ do not investigate ‘consciousness has a sign,’ or ‘is signless,’ do not investigate ‘consciousness is wished for’ or ‘is wishless,’ and do not investigate ‘consciousness is isolated’ or ‘not isolated.’
 “Similarly, they do not investigate ‘the perfection of giving . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of morality . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of patience . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of perseverance . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of concentration . . . ,’ and ‘the perfection of wisdom is permanent’  or ‘impermanent.’ Similarly, connect this with they do not investigate ‘the perfection of wisdom is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘is self’ or ‘no self,’ ‘is calm’ or ‘not calm,’ ‘is empty’ or ‘not empty,’ ‘has a sign’ or ‘is signless,’ ‘is wished for’ or ‘is wishless,’ or ‘is isolated’ or ‘not isolated.’
 “Similarly, they do not investigate ‘inner emptiness is permanent’ or ‘impermanent.’ Similarly, connect this with each, up to they do not investigate ‘emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is permanent’ or ‘impermanent,’ up to they do not investigate ‘emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty’ or ‘not empty,’ up to they do not investigate ‘it is isolated’ or ‘not isolated.’
 “Similarly, they do not investigate ‘the applications of mindfulness are permanent’ or ‘impermanent.’ Connect this in the same way with each, up to they do not investigate ‘the right efforts . . . ,’ ‘the legs of miraculous power . . . ,’ ‘the faculties . . . ,’ ‘the powers . . . ,’ ‘the limbs of awakening . . . ,’ ‘the eightfold noble path . . . ,’ ‘the ten powers . . . ,’ ‘the four fearlessnesses . . . ,’ ‘the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . ,’ ‘the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha . . . ,’ ‘all the meditative stabilizations . . . ,’ ‘all the dhāraṇī gateways . . . ,’ or ‘the knowledge of all aspects is permanent’ or ‘impermanent,’ ‘is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘is self’ or ‘no self,’ ‘is calm’ or ‘not calm,’ ‘is empty’ or ‘not empty,’ ‘has a sign’ or ‘is signless,’ ‘is wished for’ or ‘is wishless,’ or ‘is isolated’ or ‘not isolated.’ 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom investigate those dharmas like that.” 
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘Lord, it is because the nonproduction of form is not form; the nonproduction of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not consciousness; and similarly, the nonproduction of the constituents . . . the sense fields . . . the dependent originations . . . the perfections . . . all the emptinesses . . . the dharmas on the side of awakening . . . the powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . the meditative stabilizations . . . the dhāraṇī gateways . . . the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha . . . and the knowledge of all aspects is not the knowledge of all aspects’?” 
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “form is empty of form. Venerable Śāriputra, the emptiness of form is not form and is not production. Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, the nonproduction of form is not form.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of consciousness. Venerable Śāriputra, the emptiness of consciousness is not consciousness and is not production. Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, the nonproduction of consciousness is not consciousness.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of giving is empty of the perfection of giving. Venerable Śāriputra, the emptiness of the perfection of giving is not the perfection of giving and is not production. Similarly,  Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom. The emptiness of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom and is not production. Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, the nonproduction of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, inner emptiness is empty of inner emptiness. Venerable Śāriputra, the emptiness of inner emptiness is not inner emptiness and is not production, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The emptiness of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and it is not production. Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, the nonproduction of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, the applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness. The emptiness of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness and is not production. Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . the path . . . the ten powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . the meditative stabilizations . . . the dhāraṇī gateways . . . the buddhadharmas . . . and the knowledge of all aspects is empty of the knowledge of all aspects. The emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects is not the knowledge of all aspects and is not production. Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations,  the nonproduction of the knowledge of all aspects is not the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘It is because a decrease in form is not form; a decrease in feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not consciousness; and similarly, a decrease in the constituents . . . the sense fields  . . . the dependent originations . . . the emptinesses . . . the dharmas on the side of awakening . . . the perfections . . . the powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . the buddhadharmas, up to and the knowledge of all aspects is not the knowledge of all aspects’?” 
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “it is because decrease, form, and not being divided, as well as decrease, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, and not being divided—all those dharmas are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. The constituents, the sense fields, the dependent originations, the perfections, the dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and the knowledge of all aspects are similar, so decrease, the knowledge of all aspects, and not being divided—all those dharmas  are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, a decrease in form is not form, and a decrease in feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not consciousness. Connect this in the same way with each, up to a decrease in the knowledge of all aspects is not the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘Anything called form is counted as not two. Similarly, anything called feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is counted as not two, up to anything called the knowledge of all aspects is counted as not two’?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “it is because nonproduction is not one thing and form another; nonproduction itself is form, and form itself is nonproduction. It is because nonproduction is not one thing and feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness another; nonproduction itself is consciousness, and consciousness itself is nonproduction. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, anything called form is counted as not two, and anything called feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is counted as not two—similarly with the constituents, the sense fields, the dependent originations, the perfections, the dharmas on the side of awakening,  all the emptinesses, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, it is because nonproduction is not one thing and the knowledge of all aspects another; nonproduction itself is the knowledge of all aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects itself is nonproduction. Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, anything called the knowledge of all aspects is counted as not two.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom investigate those dharmas like that, because of absolute purity they then view the nonproduction of form; because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of a self; and because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of a being, a living being, one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who feels, one who knows, and one who sees. Similarly, because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of the constituents, sense fields, and dependent origination; because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of the perfection of giving; and similarly, because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom;  because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of inner emptiness, up to because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of the applications of mindfulness; and because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, path, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, dhāraṇīs, meditative stabilization gateways, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and the knowledge of all aspects. Because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of an ordinary person; because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of the dharmas of an ordinary person; because of absolute purity they view the nonproduction of a stream enterer and the dharmas of a stream enterer, a once-returner and the dharmas of a once-returner, a non-returner and the dharmas of a non-returner, a worthy one and the dharmas of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha and the dharmas of a pratyekabuddha, a bodhisattva and the dharmas of a bodhisattva, and a buddha; and they view the nonproduction of the buddha dharmas.”
 Śāriputra then said, “According to the way I understand the meaning of what venerable Subhūti has said, form is a nonproduction; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are a nonproduction; the constituents are a nonproduction, the sense fields are a nonproduction, and dependent origination is a nonproduction; the perfections  are a nonproduction; all the emptinesses are a nonproduction; the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are a nonproduction; the meditative stabilizations and dhāraṇī gateways are a nonproduction; the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are a nonproduction; the knowledge of all aspects is a nonproduction; an ordinary person is a nonproduction and the dharmas of an ordinary person are a nonproduction; a stream enterer and the dharmas of a stream enterer, a once-returner and the dharmas of a once-returner, a non-returner and the dharmas of a non-returner, a worthy one and the dharmas of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha and the dharmas of a pratyekabuddha, a bodhisattva and the dharmas of a bodhisattva, and a buddha are a nonproduction; and the buddha dharmas are a nonproduction.
 “Venerable Subhūti, if form is a nonproduction, up to the buddha dharmas are a nonproduction, then, Venerable Subhūti, will śrāvakas not have already gained śrāvaka awakening, and similarly, ordinary persons not have already gained . . . up to pratyekabuddha awakening as well?  Similarly, will bodhisattvas not have already gained the knowledge of all aspects, will the five forms of life not also be undifferentiable, and will bodhisattva great beings not have already gained the five awakenings? Venerable Subhūti, if all dharmas are a nonproduction, why would stream enterers cultivate the path in order to eliminate the three fetters; once-returners cultivate the path in order to weaken greed, hatred, and confusion; non-returners cultivate the path in order to eliminate the five fetters that are associated with the lower realms;  worthy ones cultivate the path in order to eliminate the five fetters that are associated with the upper realms; and those in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle cultivate the path in order to reach their own awakening? Why do bodhisattva great beings undertake the difficult practices for the sake of beings and experience those sufferings, whatever they may be; why has a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and why has a tathāgata turned the wheel of the Dharma?”
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that an unproduced dharma has an attainment, or a clear realization. I do not accept that which is unproduced becomes a stream enterer. I do not accept that which is unproduced has the result of stream enterer. I do not accept that which is unproduced becomes a once-returner and has the result of once-returner, a non-returner and result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one and the result of the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening and a pratyekabuddha. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that bodhisattvas are undertaking difficult practices, or that bodhisattva great beings practice with the idea of difficulty. And why? Because it is not possible, Venerable Śāriputra, for bodhisattva great beings who entertain the idea of difficulty to work for the welfare of infinite, countless beings. Rather, Venerable Śāriputra, by generating the perception they are a father, generating the perception they are a mother, generating the perception they are a son, generating the perception they are ‘me,’ they can work for the welfare of infinite, countless beings. Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings must produce this thought:  ‘Just as we say “self” again and again but it does not exist and cannot be apprehended as anyone at all in any way at all, we must produce that thought in just such a way about all inner and outer dharmas as well.’ If they produce such an idea, then the idea of difficulty does not arise. And why? Because bodhisattva great beings do not appropriate and do not apprehend any dharma as anything at all in any way at all. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in the absence of production I do not accept that there is the state of a tathāgata and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and I do not accept a turning of the wheel of the Dharma. 
 “I do not accept that an unproduced dharma attains an unproduced attainment.” 
 “Well then, Venerable Subhūti, does an unproduced dharma attain a produced attainment, or does a produced dharma attain an unproduced attainment?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that a produced dharma attains an unproduced attainment, nor do I accept that an unproduced dharma attains a produced attainment.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, is there then no attainment and is there no clear realization?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, there is an attainment and there is a clear realization, but not in a dual way. Venerable Śāriputra, attainment and clear realization are labeled by ordinary convention. A stream enterer, or once-returner, or non-returner, or worthy one, or pratyekabuddha, or bodhisattva—even a buddha—is labeled by ordinary convention. Ultimately there is no attainment and there is no clear realization, there is no  stream enterer, there is no once-returner, there is no non-returner, there is no worthy one, there is no pratyekabuddha, there is no bodhisattva, and there is not even a buddha.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, is the unproduced similar to an attainment and a clear realization that, as ordinary convention, is formless, cannot be pointed out, does not obstruct, and has only one mark—that is, no mark?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra, exactly so,” Subhūti replied. “Because of this one of many explanations, neither is production produced nor is nonproduction produced.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, are you confident in your readiness to say again and again that ‘dharmas are unproduced’? Are you also confident in your readiness to say there is no production of unproduced dharmas?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “In regard to what you have said, Venerable Śāriputra—‘Are you confident in your readiness to say again and again that “dharmas are unproduced”?’—I have no confident readiness to say again and again that dharmas are unproduced. I have no confident readiness to say there is no production of unproduced dharmas. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, an unproduced dharma, nonproduction, confident readiness, saying something, and a state of production—all those dharmas are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark.” 
 “Venerable Subhūti, is there no production of saying, is there also no production of confident readiness, and is there also no production of a dharma? Are those dharmas that are the point of departure for what has to be said  also not produced?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti. “There is no production of saying, there is also no production of confident readiness, and there is also no production of a dharma. Those dharmas that are the point of departure for a confidence giving a readiness to speak are not produced. And why? Because there is no production of form, and there is no production of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Similarly, there is no production of the constituents, the sense fields, or dependent originations; of the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇīs, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; up to there is no production of the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Subhūti,” agreed Śāriputra. “There is no production of saying, there is also no production of confident readiness, and there is also no production of a dharma; those dharmas that are the point of departure for a confidence giving a readiness to speak are not produced. There is no production of the aggregates, the constituents, sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, the dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇīs, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Connect this in the same way with there is no production of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Since this is the case the five forms of life are differentiable as ordinary conventions, but not ultimately.” 
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra, exactly so,” agreed Subhūti. “Venerable Śāriputra, just as attainment and clear realization exist as ordinary conventions, similarly the five forms of life too are differentiable as ordinary conventions, but not ultimately. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because ultimately there is no maturation of karma, there is no production, there is no cessation, there is no defilement, and there is no purification.” 
 “Venerable Subhūti, is an unproduced dharma produced, or is a produced dharma produced?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that an unproduced dharma is produced, nor do I accept that a produced dharma is produced.” 
 “Venerable Subhūti, what unproduced dharma do you not accept is produced?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that unproduced form is produced; I do not accept that unproduced feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are produced; and similarly with the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. I do not accept that unproduced awakening is attained; I do not accept that it is clearly realized.” 
 “Venerable Subhūti, what produced dharma do you not accept is produced?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that a produced form empty of an intrinsic nature is produced. Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept  that a produced feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness empty of an intrinsic nature is produced. Venerable Śāriputra, connect this in the same way with I do not accept . . . , up to a produced awakening empty of an intrinsic nature is produced.” 
 “Venerable Subhūti, is an unproduced dharma produced, or is a produced dharma produced?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, the unproduced is not produced, and the produced is not produced either. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because both produced and unproduced dharmas are neither conjoined nor disjoined because there is no production. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because there is no production of form; there is no production of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; and similarly, there is no production of the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇīs, the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Connect this in the same way with physical volitional factors, verbal volitional factors, or mental volitional factors, up to there is no production of the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, there is no production of saying, there is also no production of confident readiness, and there is also no production of a dharma; those dharmas that are the point of departure for a confidence giving a readiness to speak are not produced.”
 Śāriputra then declared, “Venerable Subhūti should be placed highest among Dharma teachers. And why? Because he escapes right from whatever it is he is asked about.” 
 Subhūti replied, “It is because all dharmas have no fixed position.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, in what way do all dharmas have no fixed position?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, form is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both. Venerable Śāriputra, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, the eyes are empty of a basic nature. They have no fixed position inside, they have no fixed position outside, and they cannot be apprehended without both. Venerable Śāriputra, the ears . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . and the thinking mind is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, a form is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both. Venerable Śāriputra, a sound . . . a smell . . . a taste . . . a feeling . . . and a dharma is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of giving is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both. Venerable Śāriputra, similarly the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom  is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, inner emptiness is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both. Venerable Śāriputra, . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, the applications of mindfulness are empty of a basic nature. They have no fixed position inside, they have no fixed position outside, and they cannot be apprehended without both. Venerable Śāriputra, similarly the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . and the path is empty of a basic nature. It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, the powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of a basic nature. They have no fixed position inside, they have no fixed position outside, and they cannot be apprehended without both. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, all dharmas have no fixed position because they are empty of a basic nature. 
 “It is thus, Venerable Śāriputra, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections should purify form; should purify feeling, perception, volitional factors, and  consciousness; should purify the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the meditative stabilizations, the dhāraṇīs, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; up to should purify the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Venerable Subhūti how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections purify the awakening path?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, there is an ordinary perfection of giving and there is an extraordinary perfection of giving. Similarly, there is an ordinary perfection of morality . . . perfection of patience . . . perfection of perseverance . . . perfection of concentration . . . and perfection of wisdom and there is an extraordinary perfection of wisdom.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, what is an ordinary perfection of giving and what is an extraordinary one?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “here bodhisattva great beings become givers, great philanthropists, and give food to those leading a secluded religious life, to brahmins, to the pitiful, to the destitute, to travelers, and to those who are begging for food. They give drinks to those who want drink, transport to those who want transport, clothes to those who want clothes, flowers to those who want flowers, flower garlands to those who want flower garlands, incense to those  who want incense, creams to those who want creams, homes to those who want a home, seats and beds to those who want seats and beds, tools to those who want tools, medicine to those who want medicine, up to whatever human requirements are appropriate—a son to those who want a son; a daughter to those who want a daughter; a wife to those who want a wife; a kingdom to those who want a kingdom; their head to those who want a head; their eyes to those who want eyes; a major or minor part of their body to those who want a major or minor part of the body; and their flesh, blood, and marrow to those who want flesh, blood, and marrow. They give all that away with a fixed position, thinking, ‘I am giving, they are receiving, this is charity, that is stinginess, I am a philanthropist, I am giving all my possessions away, I am doing what the buddhas said to do, I am practicing the perfection of giving.’ Having given those gifts by way of apprehending something, they make them into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, thinking, ‘Through the result of this charity of mine may those beings be happy in this life and may they, without appropriating anything, enter into complete nirvāṇa.’ 
 “They give those gifts attached to the three attachments. To which three? To the idea of self, the idea of other, and the idea of giving. Attached to those three attachments they give those gifts. 
 “That is called the ordinary perfection of giving. And why is it called the ordinary perfection of giving?  Because it does not move from the ordinary, does not transcend the ordinary, and does not pass beyond the ordinary. Because of this it is called the ordinary perfection of giving.
 “What is an extraordinary perfection of giving? It is the purity of the three spheres. And what is the purity of the three spheres? Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings giving gifts do not apprehend a self, do not apprehend a recipient, do not apprehend giving, and do not delight in its maturation. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ purity of the three spheres.
 “Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings giving gifts give away gifts to all beings but without apprehending all beings, without apprehending a self, and without apprehending a gift; they dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening but without apprehending even awakening. That, Venerable Śāriputra, is called the extraordinary perfection of giving. And why is it called the extraordinary perfection of giving? Because it moves from the ordinary, transcends the ordinary, and passes beyond the ordinary. Because of this it is called the extraordinary perfection of giving.
 “The perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration are similar to that. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, there is also an ordinary perfection of wisdom and there is also an extraordinary one. 
 “What is the ordinary perfection of wisdom?  Venerable Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings with a fixed position apprehending ‘I have curbed miserly thoughts’ give gifts fixed on the ideas of self, beings, and giving, giving away all their possessions—inner and outer things, owned and unowned—whatever they may be. 
 “Firm in the good qualities of the ascetic, with a fixed position apprehending body, speech, and mind, and with a fixed view of self, a fixed view of beings, and a fixed view of the wholesome, they devote themselves to morality and the ten wholesome actions. Having made those moralities into something shared in common by all beings, with an apprehension of awakening they dedicate them to awakening by way of apprehending something. 
 “With a fixed view of praising self and disparaging others, self and beings, and patience, they put up with all the nasty things beings do, and, having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, dedicate them, by way of apprehending something, to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Apprehending a body, apprehending a collection of merit, apprehending a collection of knowledge, apprehending self, apprehending beings, and apprehending awakening, they make a vigorous attempt, and on account of that they falsely project that they are making a vigorous attempt.
 “They meditate on love, compassion, joy, and equanimity; become absorbed in and emerge from the concentrations, clairvoyances, concentrations, and absorptions; and on account of relishing them  falsely project them. With a view that apprehends something, having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate them to awakening. Those are the ordinary ones.
 “Apprehending ‘form is empty’; apprehending ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are empty’; and similarly, apprehending up to ‘the awakening of a buddha is empty,’ they meditate on emptiness, which is to say, they practice while apprehending those, and having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate them, again by way of apprehending them, to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Without skillful means (1) they confess, by way of apprehending them, all wrongdoings; (2) while apprehending, they rejoice in all the merits of self and others; and (3) they request all the buddhas to teach for the welfare of self and others, and having made the three aggregates of merit into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate them without skillful means to the knowledge of all aspects. That is called the ordinary perfection of wisdom. 
 “What is the extraordinary perfection of wisdom? With wisdom that does not apprehend self, beings, or what is to be given, they purify the perfection of giving for awakening through the purity of the three spheres; without apprehending self, beings, morality, or awakening, they purify the perfection of morality for awakening through the purity of the three spheres; without apprehending self, patience, or awakening, they purify the perfection of patience for awakening through the purity of the three spheres; without apprehending self, body, mind,  perseverance, merit, or knowledge, they purify the perfection of perseverance for awakening through the purity of the three spheres; without apprehending self, beings, concentrations, meditative stabilizations, or absorptions, they purify the perfection of concentration for awakening through the purity of the three spheres; without apprehending all beings, they purify the perfection of wisdom for awakening, and they dedicate all the wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening with a dedication free from poison, an unsurpassed dedication, a dedication equal to the unequaled, an inconceivable dedication, an incomparable dedication, a dedication that is infinite.
 “That is called the extraordinary perfection of wisdom.
 “Why is it called ordinary, worldly and why extraordinary, supramundane? 
 “There ordinary, worldly is used in seven different ways: on account of them the world is established; the world is the same as them; on account of them there is something given to the world; on account of them  they do not escape the world; they are for the coming into being of the world; and they come into being in the world. Those are called ordinary, worldly.
 “What is extraordinary, supramundane? It is used in seven different ways: on account of them the world goes free; they eliminate the world; on account of them a world causes an escape; those that are not the world; the world from which they will escape; those who free from the world; and those who free in the world. Those are called extraordinary, supramudane.
 “It is thus, Venerable Śāriputra, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections purify the awakening path.” 
 “Venerable Subhūti, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening path?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, the four applications of mindfulness are the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening path. The four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; the emptiness, signless, and wishless gateways to liberation; inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; and all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇī gateways, the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, and great compassion—those, Venerable Śāriputra, are called the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening path.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, for the perfection of what is this the labor?” asked Śāriputra.
 Subhūti replied, “This is the labor, Venerable Śāriputra, for the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom is the one that gives birth to śrāvaka dharmas,  pratyekabuddha dharmas, bodhisattva dharmas, buddha dharmas, and all wholesome dharmas. Venerable Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom incorporates and includes śrāvaka dharmas, pratyekabuddha dharmas, bodhisattva dharmas, buddha dharmas, and all wholesome dharmas. Venerable Śāriputra, having practiced this perfection of wisdom those earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; Venerable Śāriputra, having trained in this same perfection of wisdom, future tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and, Venerable Śāriputra, having trained in this same perfection of wisdom, tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas now dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in all ten directions fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, if, when this perfection of wisdom has been explained, bodhisattva great beings do not become unsure and do not become perplexed, you should know that those bodhisattva great beings stay in that state, without staying in that state, in order to protect beings,  in order not to abandon beings, and you should know that the bodhisattva great beings, furthermore, stay in that state, by way of not staying in that state, inseparable from attention to great compassion.”
 Śāriputra replied, “Venerable Subhūti, if you accept that those who stay in that state, staying in a state inseparable from paying attention to great compassion, are bodhisattva great beings, in that case, Venerable Subhūti, all beings will be bodhisattvas. And why? Because all beings are inseparable from attention.” 
 “Excellent, excellent, Venerable Śāriputra,” said Subhūti. “I will object to venerable Śāriputra in that venerable Śāriputra has got at just what is meant by expressing the statement as an absolute.
 “And why? Venerable Śāriputra, you should know that the nonexistence of attention is because of the nonexistence of a being; you should know that the emptiness of attention is because of the emptiness of a being; you should know that the isolation of attention is because of the isolation of a being; you should know that the absence of an intrinsic nature in attention is because of the absence of an intrinsic nature in a being; and you should know that there is no full awakening of attention because there is no full awakening of a being. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, you should know that the nonexistence of attention is because of the nonexistence of form; you should know that the emptiness of attention is because of the emptiness of form; you should know that the isolation of attention is because of the isolation of form; you should know that the absence of an intrinsic nature in attention is because of the absence of an intrinsic nature in form; and you should know that there is no full awakening of attention because there is no full awakening of form. 
 “Similarly,  you should know that the nonexistence of attention is because of the nonexistence of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness; you should know that the emptiness of attention is because of the emptiness of consciousness; you should know that the isolation of attention is because of the isolation of consciousness; you should know that the absence of an intrinsic nature in attention is because of the absence of an intrinsic nature in consciousness; and you should know that there is no full awakening of attention because there is no full awakening of consciousness. 
 “Similarly, you should know that the nonexistence of attention is because of the nonexistence of the constituents . . . the sense fields . . . dependent origination . . . the truths . . . the dharmas on the side of awakening . . . the perfections . . . all the emptinesses . . . all the meditative stabilizations . . . all the dhāraṇī gateways, up to and the knowledge of all aspects. Similarly, you should know that because of the emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects, the isolation of the knowledge of all aspects, the absence of an intrinsic nature in the knowledge of all aspects, and because there is no full awakening of the knowledge of all aspects, there is no full awakening of attention.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, I say bodhisattva great beings are not separated from staying in this state or from this attention.”
 The Lord then complimented venerable Subhūti: “Excellent, excellent, Subhūti! You should give instruction in the perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings just like this, just as you have explained through the Tathāgata’s power, and bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of wisdom just as you explain.” 
 As venerable Subhūti was expounding this perfection of wisdom chapter, the great billionfold world system  shook in six ways: it shook, shook greatly, and shook violently; quaked, quaked greatly, and quaked violently; stirred, stirred greatly, and stirred violently; became disturbed, greatly disturbed, and violently disturbed; roared, roared greatly, and roared violently; and resounded, resounded greatly, and resounded violently. The eastern direction sank down and the western direction rose up; the western direction sank down and the eastern direction rose up; the southern direction sank down and the northern direction rose up; the northern direction sank down and the southern direction rose up; the middle sank down and the edges rose up; and the edges sank down and the middle rose up.
 Then at that moment the Lord smiled. Venerable Subhūti then inquired of the Lord, “Lord, why did you smile? What is the cause, what is the condition?”
 The Lord replied, “Subhūti, just as inside this Sahā world system the perfection of wisdom is being taught, similarly in infinite, countless world systems in the eastern direction the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas are also teaching this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Similarly, all around in infinite, countless world systems in the ten directions, tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas are teaching this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings.” 
 As venerable Subhūti was expounding this perfection of wisdom chapter, two billion living beings of divine and human rank gained forbearance for dharmas that are not produced, and as the lord buddhas were teaching this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings in all the ten directions, infinite,  countless numbers of beings produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
This was the twenty-first chapter, “Subhūti,” of the “Eighteen Thousand Mother of All Buddhas and Bodhisattvas Perfection of Wisdom.”
Chapter 22: Śatakratu
And indeed all the Four Mahārājas stationed in the great billionfold world system together with many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion gods were assembled in that very retinue, as were the Śatakratus, heads of the gods, and the Suyāmas, Saṃtuṣitas, Nirmāṇaratis, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartins, and Brahmapurohitas, up to the Brahmās together with many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion gods also assembled, and as many Brahmās, up to Śuddhāvāsa classes of gods stationed in the great billionfold world system together with hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion gods, also were assembled. The light originating from the maturation of earlier karma coming from the bodies of those Cāturmahā­rājika gods, and the light originating from the maturation of earlier karma coming from the bodies of those Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin classes of gods, and Brahmakāyika gods, up to the Śuddhāvāsa class of gods, does not approach the natural light of the Tathāgata even by a hundredth part, or by a thousandth part, or by a hundred thousandth part, or by a hundred-thousand hundred-millionth part; it would not stand up to any number, or fraction, or counting, or example, or comparison. In the presence of the natural light of the Tathāgata all the lights originating from the maturation of earlier karma coming from the bodies of the gods do not gleam, do not radiate, and do not shine.  Among those the light of the Tathāgata reveals itself as the highest, reveals itself as special, and reveals itself as the best, superb, exemplary, unsurpassed, and unrivaled. As an analogy, just as a fired iron statue in the presence of the golden Jambū River does not gleam, does not radiate, and does not shine, similarly, in the presence of the natural light of the Tathāgata all the lights originating from the maturation of earlier karma coming from the bodies of the gods do not gleam, do not radiate, and do not shine. Among those the light of the Tathāgata reveals itself as the highest, reveals itself as special, and reveals itself as the best, superb, exemplary, unsurpassed, and unrivaled.
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, these Cāturmahā­rājika gods, these Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin classes of gods, up to these Śuddhāvāsa class of gods stationed in the great billionfold world system are all assembled, venerable monk Subhūti, to listen to the Dharma. They want to hear instruction in the perfection of wisdom, so, venerable monk Subhūti, how should bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of wisdom? What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom? And how should bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom?”
 Venerable Subhūti then replied to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Well then, Kauśika, listen well and hard and pay attention, and I will give instructions,  through the power of the Buddha, possessed by the Buddha, in what the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom is, and in how bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom, and how bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of wisdom.
 “Those gods who have not produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they too must produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Those who have entered into the flawlessness that is a perfect state are incapable of producing the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Because the boundaries are fixed for them by the stream of saṃsāra. And yet if they also produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, I still rejoice in them also. I will not stand between them and their wholesome side, because they have to get hold of the dharmas that are the most special, that are higher than even the special dharmas. 
 “Kauśika, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom? Here bodhisattva great beings with a thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects should pay attention to form as impermanent, and they should pay attention to it as suffering, selfless, empty, a disease, a boil, a thorn, a misfortune, dependent, by its nature headed to destruction, shaky, brittle, a hazard, persecution, and a headache, and that without apprehending anything.
 “Similarly, they should pay attention to feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; similarly to the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind; and similarly to the earth element, water element, fire  element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element as impermanent. They should pay attention to them as suffering, selfless, empty, a disease, a boil, a thorn, a misfortune, dependent, by their nature headed to destruction, shaky, brittle, a hazard, persecution, and like a headache, and that without apprehending anything. 
 “With a thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects they should pay attention to ‘the volitional factors arising from ignorance as the condition.’ They should pay attention to them as impermanent, suffering, selfless, calm, isolated, and empty. They should pay attention to ‘consciousness arising from volitional factors as the condition, name and form from consciousness as the condition, the six sense fields from name and form as the condition, contact from the six sense fields as the condition, feeling from contact as the condition, craving from feeling as the condition, appropriation from craving as the condition, existence from appropriation as condition, birth from existence as the condition, and old age and death, pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief arising from birth as the condition—thus the arising of simply this great heap of suffering,’ and they should pay attention to all of that as impermanent, suffering, selfless, calm, isolated, and empty, and that without apprehending anything.
 “With attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects they should pay attention to ‘the cessation of volitional factors from the cessation of ignorance,’ and to that as selfless, calm, isolated, emptiness, signless, wishless, and not occasioning anything. They should pay attention to ‘the cessation of consciousness from the cessation of volitional factors,  the cessation of name and form from the cessation of consciousness, the cessation of the six sense fields from the cessation of name and form, the cessation of contact from the cessation of the six sense fields, the cessation of feeling from the cessation of contact, the cessation of craving from the cessation of feeling, the cessation of appropriation from the cessation of craving, the cessation of existence from the cessation of appropriation, the cessation of birth from the cessation of existence, and the cessation of old age and death, pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief from the cessation of birth—thus the cessation of simply this great heap of suffering,’ and to all of that as selfless, calm, isolated, emptiness, signless, wishless, and not occasioning anything, and that without apprehending anything. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings with a thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects cultivate the four applications of mindfulness, and that without apprehending anything. Similarly, they cultivate the four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path, as well as the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and they cultivate them without apprehending anything. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings with a thought-production connected with the knowledge of all aspects practice the perfection of giving, and they practice it without apprehending anything. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings with the thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects practice the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration,  and perfection of wisdom, and practice them without apprehending anything. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, when bodhisattva great beings with a thought-production connected with the knowledge of all aspects are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they thus, putting one part of the picture together with the other parts, while thinking, applying, completing, and extending, make a detailed and thorough analysis of all these parts together, thinking, ‘They are selfless, they are not me, and they are not mine.’ And why? Because the bodhisattva great beings’ thought of the wholesome roots is not touched by the thought of awakening, and neither is the thought of dedication touched by the thought of the wholesome roots. Kauśika, the thought of the wholesome roots does not exist and is not apprehended in the thought of awakening, and the thought of awakening also does not exist and is not apprehended in the thought of the wholesome roots; the thought of awakening does not exist and is not apprehended in the thought of dedication, and the thought of dedication also does not exist and is not apprehended in the thought of awakening. The thought of the wholesome roots does not exist in the thought of the wholesome roots, the thought of awakening does not exist in the thought of awakening, and the thought of dedication does not exist in the thought of dedication. Kauśika, this not settling down on and not apprehending any one part, even while thus making an examination of all the parts of the picture, is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, inquired of venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, how is it that the thought of dedication is not touched by the thought of awakening? How is it that the thought of awakening  is not touched by the thought of dedication? How is it that the thought of dedication does not exist and is not apprehended in the thought of awakening, and how is it that the thought of awakening does not exist and is not apprehended in the thought of dedication?”
 “Kauśika,” replied Subhūti, “the thought of dedication is no thought, and the thought of awakening is no thought. Therefore, because what is no thought is inconceivable, and what is inconceivable is no thought, a state of no thought does not dedicate a state of no thought, and the inconceivable does not dedicate the inconceivable. So, the state of no thought is inconceivable, and the inconceivable is the state of no thought. That, Kauśika, is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom.”
 Then the Lord said to venerable Subhūti, “Excellent, Subhūti, excellent! The instruction in the perfection of wisdom you give bodhisattva great beings, Subhūti—the enthusiasm you convey to them—is excellent indeed!” 
 Subhūti replied, “I have to feel a sense of appreciation, Lord, and not feel no sense of appreciation, because earlier when you, Lord, were practicing the bodhisattva way of life in the presence of earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, their śrāvakas advised and instructed you in the six perfections—they taught them to you, made you take them up, made you excited about them and motivated, and caused you to enter into them and established you in them. Having done so, Lord, in the form of a bodhisattva  you trained in the six perfections and awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Like that we too, Lord, have to advise, instruct, teach, inspire to take up, excite, motivate, cause to enter into, and establish the bodhisattva great beings in the six perfections—bodhisattva great beings who, advised, instructed, taught, inspired to take up, excited, motivated, caused to enter into, and established by us, will also awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “So then, Kauśika, listen well and hard and pay attention, and I will explain how bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom, and how they should not stand.
 “Kauśika, form is empty of form; feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of consciousness; and a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, Kauśika, the emptiness of form; the emptiness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; and the emptiness of a bodhisattva are not two and are not divided. Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom like that.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, the eyes are empty of the eyes; the ears . . . the nose . . .  the tongue . . . the body . . . and the thinking mind is empty of the thinking mind; and a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, the emptiness of the eyes; the emptiness of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind; and the emptiness of a bodhisattva are not two and are not divided. Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom like that.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, the earth element is empty of the earth element; the water element . . . fire element . . . wind element . . . space element . . . and consciousness element is empty of the consciousness element; and a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, the emptiness of the earth element; the emptiness of the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element; and the emptiness of a bodhisattva are not two and are not divided. Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom like that.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, ignorance is empty of ignorance; similarly, volitional factors . . . consciousness . . . name and form . . . the six sense fields . . . contact . . . feeling . . . craving . . . appropriation . . . existence . . . birth . . . and old age and death is empty of old age and death; the cessation of ignorance is empty of the cessation of ignorance; similarly, the cessation of volitional factors . . . consciousness . . . name and form . . . the six sense fields . . . contact . . . feeling . . . craving . . . appropriation . . . existence . . . birth . . . and old age and death is empty of the cessation of old age and death; and a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, the emptiness of ignorance and the emptiness of the cessation of ignorance, up to the emptiness of old age and death and the emptiness of the cessation of old age and death, and the emptiness of a bodhisattva are not two and are not divided. Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom like that.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, the perfection of giving is empty of the perfection of giving; similarly, the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom; and a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, the emptiness of the perfection of giving; the emptiness of the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom, and the emptiness of a bodhisattva, are not two and are not divided. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, inner emptiness is empty of inner emptiness; up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; and a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, the emptiness of inner emptiness; up to the emptiness of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; and the emptiness of a bodhisattva are not two and are not divided. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, the applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness. The right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . the eightfold noble path . . . the ten powers . . .  the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . up to the distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of the distinct attributes of a buddha. A bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, the emptiness of the applications of mindfulness . . . ; up to the emptiness of the distinct attributes of a buddha; and the emptiness of a bodhisattva are not two and are not divided. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, the meditative stabilizations are empty of the meditative stabilizations, the dhāraṇī gateways are empty of the dhāraṇī gateways, and a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, the emptiness of the meditative stabilizations, the emptiness of the dhāraṇī gateways, and the emptiness of a bodhisattva are not two and are not divided. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, the Śrāvaka Vehicle is empty of the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle is empty of the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the Great Vehicle is empty of the Great Vehicle. A śrāvaka is empty of the state of a śrāvaka, a pratyekabuddha is empty of the state of a pratyekabuddha, and a buddha is empty of buddhahood. And a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, the emptiness of the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the emptiness of the state of a śrāvaka, up to the emptiness of the Great Vehicle, the emptiness of buddhahood, and the emptiness of a bodhisattva are not two and are not divided. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, up to the knowledge of all aspects is empty of the knowledge of all aspects, and a bodhisattva is empty of a bodhisattva. Thus, up to the emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects and the emptiness of a bodhisattva  are not two and are not divided. Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom like that.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, how should bodhisattva great beings not stand in the perfection of wisdom?” 
 “Kauśika,” replied Subhūti, “here bodhisattva great beings should not stand in form by way of apprehending something, and they should not stand in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness by way of apprehending something. They should not stand in the eyes, they should not stand in a form, they should not stand in eye consciousness, they should not stand in eye contact, and they should not stand in feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact. Similarly, they should not stand in the ears . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . and they should not stand in the thinking mind, dharmas, thinking-mind consciousness, thinking-mind contact, or feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not stand in the earth element by way of apprehending something, and they should not stand in the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, or consciousness element by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not stand in the applications of mindfulness by way of apprehending something, and they should not stand in the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path, or the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, distinct attributes of a buddha, or knowledge of all aspects  by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not stand in the result of stream enterer by way of apprehending something. They should not stand in the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, or the state of a pratyekabuddha by way of apprehending something. They should not stand in buddhahood by way of apprehending something.
 “Kauśika, they thus should not dwell on the idea of form by way of apprehending something, up to they should not dwell on the idea of the knowledge of all aspects by way of apprehending something. They thus should not dwell on the idea of the result of once-returner by way of apprehending something, up to they should not dwell on the idea of buddhahood by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not dwell on the idea that form is permanent by way of apprehending something. Similarly, they should not dwell on the idea that form is impermanent, is happiness, is suffering, has a self, is selfless, is calm, is not calm, is isolated, is not isolated, is empty, is not empty, has a sign, is signless, is wished for, or is wishless by way of apprehending something.
 “Similarly, they should not dwell on the ideas that feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness are permanent, are impermanent, are happiness, are suffering, have a self, are selfless, are calm, are not calm, are isolated, are not isolated, are empty, are not empty, have a sign, are signless, are a wish for, or are wishless by way of apprehending something. 
 “Similarly, they should not dwell on the idea that the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination,  the perfections, all the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, or the distinct attributes of a buddha are permanent, are impermanent, are happiness, are suffering, have a self, are selfless, are calm, are not calm, are isolated, are not isolated, are empty, are not empty, have a sign, are signless, are wished for, or are wishless by way of apprehending something. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, they should not dwell on the idea that the result of stream enterer is a category of the uncompounded by way of apprehending something. Similarly, they should not dwell on the idea the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, or the result of a pratyekabuddha is a category of the uncompounded by way of apprehending something, up to they should not dwell on the idea that the knowledge of all aspects is a category of the uncompounded by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not dwell on the idea that the result of stream enterer is worthy of gifts by way of apprehending something. Similarly, they should not dwell on the idea that the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha, or a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha is worthy of gifts by way of apprehending something.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should not stand on the first level by way of apprehending something; similarly, they should not stand on . . . up to the tenth level by way of apprehending something. And why? Because where there is a place to stand there is movement.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should not, by way of apprehending something, having stood in the first production of the thought—that is, having become a bodhisattva—dwell on the idea ‘I will complete the perfection of giving,’ and similarly, they should not dwell on the idea ‘I will complete the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance,  the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom’ by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not dwell on the idea ‘I will complete the applications of mindfulness’ by way of apprehending something, and they should not dwell on the idea ‘I will complete the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and the path’ by way of apprehending something. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will, having entered into a bodhisattva great being’s flawlessness, stand on the irreversible level.’ Bodhisattva great beings should not dwell on the idea ‘I will complete the five clairvoyances’ by way of apprehending something. Bodhisattva great beings should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will, standing in the bodhisattva great beings’ five clairvoyances, approach infinite, countless buddhafields to bow down to and attend on the lord buddhasand listen to the Dharma, and having listened I will practice it for suchness and teach others.’ Bodhisattva great beings should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will bring buddhafields into being that are just like those of those lord buddhas.’ Bodhisattva great being should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will, having practiced the perfection of wisdom, bring beings to maturity in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ 
 “Bodhisattva great beings should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will, having gone to infinite, countless world systems, show respect to, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, and worship the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas with flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, and I will offer to the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion pieces of the finest clothing. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings should not dwell on the idea ‘I will establish infinite, countless beings beyond measure in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening’ by way of apprehending something.
 “Bodhisattva great beings should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will make the five eyes perfect: the flesh eye, divine eye, wisdom eye, dharma eye, and buddha eye.’ They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will make the meditative stabilizations perfect.’ They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will play in whichever meditative stabilization I want to play in.’ They should not dwell on the idea ‘I will make the dhāraṇī gateways perfect’ by way of apprehending something.
 “Bodhisattva great beings should not dwell on the idea ‘I will make the ten tathāgata powers perfect’ by way of apprehending something; they should not dwell on the idea ‘I will make the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha perfect’ by way of apprehending something; and they should not dwell on the idea  ‘I will make great love and great compassion perfect’ by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not dwell on the idea ‘I will make the major marks of a great person perfect on the body’ by way of apprehending something, and they should not dwell on the idea ‘I will make the eighty minor signs perfect on the body’ by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that a faith follower and Dharma follower are the eighth; the one stopped at most seven times is a stream enterer. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the ideas of those born in family after family, and those who have one interruption. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that one whose life has come to an end and whose afflictions have come to an end is the person equal in stature. They should not dwell on the idea that a stream enterer enters nirvāṇa in the intermediate state by way of apprehending something. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that a once-returner, having come once to this world, makes an end to suffering. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea of a candidate for actualizing the result of non-returner. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that a non-returner will enter nirvāṇa right there. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea of a candidate for actualizing the result of a worthy one. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that right here a worthy one will pass into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. 
 “They should not dwell on the idea of a pratyekabuddha by way of apprehending something. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that a bodhisattva passes beyond the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level and will stand on the bodhisattva level. They should not dwell on the idea that there is the knowledge of a knower of path aspects by way of apprehending something.  They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that, having completely awakened fully to all dharmas, all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions have come to an end. 
 “They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will, as a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha, completely awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and turn the wheel of Dharma.’ They should even not dwell on such an idea as ‘having done the work of a buddha, I will lead infinite, countless beings to nirvāṇa’ by way of apprehending something.
 “They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea ‘I will, standing on the four legs of miraculous power, become completely absorbed in meditative stabilization, and through having become completely absorbed in that sort of meditative stabilization I will remain for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River.’
 “They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that the length of their lives will become infinite. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that each of their major marks will become perfected through a hundred merits. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that the size of their buddhafield will be the combined size of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east, and similarly, of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that their great billionfold world system will be made of diamonds. 
 “They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that from their Bodhi tree such fragrances must emanate that for those beings who smell those fragrances greed will not harm them; hatred and confusion will not harm them; śrāvaka thoughts and pratyekabuddha thoughts will not arise  in them; they will become fixed on unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and they will not have any physical or mental disease. 
 “They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that in their buddhafield there will not be the word form, and there will not be the words feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that there will not be the words perfection of giving, and there will not be the words perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that there will not be the words applications of mindfulness, and they should not dwell on the idea there will not be the words right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or distinct attributes of a buddha. They should not, by way of apprehending something, dwell on the idea that there will not be the words stream enterer, once-returner, non-returner, state of a worthy one, pratyekabuddha, bodhisattva, or buddha.
 “And why? Because tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas do not, having awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, apprehend any dharmas. 
 “Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings  should not stand in the perfection of wisdom like that, by way of apprehending anything.” 
 Then it occurred to venerable Śāriputra to think, “Well then, however could bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of wisdom?” 
 Then venerable Subhūti, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to venerable Śāriputra, asked venerable Śāriputra, “What do you think, Venerable Śāriputra, could the tathāgatas ever have stood anywhere?” 
 Śāriputra replied, “Venerable Subhūti, the tathāgatas could never have stood anywhere. Indeed, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have totally nonabiding minds. They have not stood in form; they have not stood in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; they have not stood in the compounded element and have not stood in the uncompounded element; and similarly, up to they have not stood in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, up to they have not stood in the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to venerable Śāriputra, “Thus it is, Venerable Śāriputra, that just as the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas have not stood in form, and have not not stood in form; have not stood in feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness, and have not not stood in consciousness, up to have not stood in the knowledge of all aspects, and have not not stood in the knowledge of all aspects, so too bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom. Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings should stand in the perfection of wisdom like that,  by way of not taking a stand.” 
 Then it occurred to certain gods in that retinue to think, “Whatever yakṣa sounds the yakṣas make, talk the yakṣas talk—whatever the yakṣas say, the statements of the yakṣas—all of those, if they are said, are comprehensible to us, but this, namely, what the elder Subhūti says about the perfection of wisdom, what he discourses on, explains, and teaches, is incomprehensible to us.”
 Then venerable Subhūti, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to those gods, asked the gods, “O gods, is what is said incomprehensible?” 
 “Incomprehensible, Ārya Subhūti!” affirmed the gods.
 Subhūti then explained, “It is because not even one syllable is said here, and what is not said is not heard. And why? Because in the perfection of wisdom there are no syllables, and in it there is neither hearing, nor teaching, nor comprehension, because in the perfect, complete awakening of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas there are also no syllables. As an analogy, gods, a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha might magically produce a magically created buddha, and he might magically produce the four magically created retinues of monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. When that magical creation teaches the four magically created retinues, what do you think, gods, has anything at all been taught or heard by anyone?” 
 “No indeed, venerable monk Subhūti, nothing,” replied the gods.
 “Similarly, gods,” continued Subhūti, “all dharmas are like a magical creation. There nobody has explained, nobody has heard, and nobody has comprehended. 
 “To illustrate, gods, when a man falls asleep and in a dream beholds a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha teaching the Dharma, what do you think, gods, has anyone explained, heard, or comprehended?”
 “No indeed, venerable monk Subhūti, no one,” replied the gods.
 “Similarly, gods,” continued Subhūti, “all dharmas are like a dream. There nobody has explained, nobody has heard, and nobody has comprehended.
 “To illustrate, gods, were two people standing in a canyon to shout out a praise of the Buddha, shout out a praise of the Dharma, and shout out a praise of the Saṅgha, the echoes of both of them would ring out. What do you think, gods, because of that first echo would the sound of the other echo be made known?”
 “No indeed, venerable monk Subhūti, it would not,” replied the gods.
 “Similarly, gods,” continued Subhūti, “all dharmas are like an echo. There nobody has explained, nobody has heard, and nobody has comprehended.
 “To illustrate, gods, when a clever magician or magician’s apprentice at the junction of two main roads conjures up a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha, who then teaches the Dharma to the four magically created retinues, what do you think, gods, has anyone explained, heard, or comprehended?”
 “No indeed, venerable monk Subhūti, no one,” replied the gods.
 “Similarly, gods,” continued Subhūti, “all dharmas are like a magical illusion. There nobody has explained, nobody has heard, and nobody has comprehended.”
 Then it occurred to those gods to think, “Yes!  This Ārya Subhūti demonstrates what is deeper than the deep, introduces what is more subtle than the subtle. Yes! This Ārya Subhūti is going to expand on the perfection of wisdom. Yes! This Ārya Subhūti is going to make the perfection of wisdom clear.”
 Then venerable Subhūti, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to those gods, said to those gods, “O gods, form is not deep and is not subtle, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not deep and are not subtle. And why? O gods, it is because the intrinsic nature of form is not deep and is not subtle, and the intrinsic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is not deep and is not subtle.
 “The eyes are not deep and are not subtle, and the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are not deep and are not subtle. A form is not deep and is not subtle, and a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas are not deep and are not subtle. The earth element is not deep and is not subtle, and the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element are not deep and are not subtle. The perfection of giving is not deep and is not subtle, and the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom are not deep and are not subtle. Inner emptiness is not deep and is not subtle, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not deep and is not subtle. The applications of mindfulness are not deep and are not subtle, and similarly, the right efforts,  legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha are not deep and are not subtle. All the meditative stabilizations and all the dhāraṇī gateways are not deep and are not subtle, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not deep and is not subtle. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not deep and is not subtle.” 
 Then it occurred to those gods to think, “Well then, in this Dharma teaching has nothing been designated form; has nothing been designated feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; has nothing been designated the constituents, sense fields, or dependent originations; has nothing been designated the perfections or the dharmas on the side of awakening; and has nothing been designated all the emptinesses, all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇī gateways, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha? In this Dharma teaching has nothing even been designated the result of stream enterer, and has nothing been designated the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, the state of a pratyekabuddha, or a bodhisattva? Has nothing been designated buddhahood? Has nothing even been designated the letters?” 
 Then venerable Subhūti, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to those gods, said to those gods,  “Exactly so, gods, exactly so. Unteachable is the awakening of the tathāgatas; there is no discourse on it, nobody has heard it, and nobody has comprehended it.
 “Therefore, gods, those who want to be candidates for the result of stream enterer and those who want to realize the result of stream enterer cannot do so without having resorted to this forbearance; those who want to realize the results of once-returner, non-returner, the state of a worthy one, the state of a pratyekabuddha, and the state of a buddha cannot do so without having resorted to this forbearance. 
 “O gods, bodhisattva great beings, from the first production of the thought of awakening onward, should stand in the perfection of wisdom like this, based on there being no discourse and no listening.” 
This was the twenty-second chapter, “Śatakratu,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 23: Hard to Understand
Then it occurred to those gods to think, “What would the elder Subhūti accept those listening to the Dharma to be like?”
 Then venerable Subhūti, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to those gods, said to those gods, “Gods, I would accept those listening to the doctrine to be like illusory beings. I would accept those listening to the doctrine to be like magically created beings. They will not listen to, master, or directly realize anything at all.”
 Then those gods asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, are beings like an illusion, and are those listening to the doctrine like an illusion? Are beings like a magical creation, and are those listening to the doctrine like a magical creation?” 
 “Exactly so, gods, exactly so,” replied Subhūti. “Beings are like an illusion, and those listening to the doctrine are like an illusion. Beings are like a magical creation, and those listening to the doctrine are like a magical creation. 
 “Beings, gods, are like a dream and are like an illusion. Form, too, gods, is like a dream  and is like an illusion. Feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, gods, are like a dream and are like an illusion. The eyes, gods, are like a dream and are like an illusion, and similarly the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are like a dream and are like an illusion. A form, gods, is like a dream and is like an illusion, and a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas are like a dream and are like an illusion. Eye consciousness, eye contact, and the feeling that arises from the condition of eye contact are like a dream and are like an illusion. Similarly, ear . . . nose . . . tongue . . . body . . . and thinking-mind consciousness, thinking-mind contact, and the feeling that arises from the condition of thinking-mind contact are like a dream and are like an illusion.
 “The perfection of giving is like a dream and is like an illusion, and the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom are like a dream and are like an illusion.
 “Inner emptiness is like a dream and is like an illusion, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is like a dream and is like an illusion.
 “The applications of mindfulness too are like a dream and are like an illusion, and the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha are like a dream and are like an illusion.
 “The result of stream enterer  is also like a dream and is like an illusion, and a stream enterer is also like a dream and is like an illusion. The result of once-returner and a once-returner, the result of non-returner and a non-returner, and the state of a worthy one and a worthy one are also like a dream and are like an illusion. A pratyekabuddha’s awakening is also like a dream and is like an illusion, and a pratyekabuddha is also like a dream and is like an illusion. Unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is also like a dream and is like an illusion, and buddhahood is also like a dream and is like an illusion.” 
 Then those gods asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, is even buddhahood like a dream, like an illusion? Is nirvāṇa like a dream and like an illusion too?”
 “Gods,” replied Subhūti, “I declare that even nirvāṇa is like a dream and is like an illusion, and if there is any dharma superior even to nirvāṇa, I declare that it too is like a dream and is like an illusion. And why? Gods, it is because a dream, an illusion, and nirvāṇa are not two and are not divided.” 
 Then venerable Śāripūtra, venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, venerable Mahākauṣṭhilya, venerable Mahākātyāyana, venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra, venerable Mahākāśyapa, and many thousands of bodhisattvas inquired of the venerable monk Subhūti, “Who will be the recipients of this perfection of wisdom so deep, so hard to behold, so hard to understand, so peaceful, so sublime, so subtle, so private, so not an object of speculative thought, so brilliant, so absolutely noble, and so much an object to be known by the learned and wise?”
 Those great śrāvakas and great bodhisattvas having thus inquired, venerable Subhūti said to them, “Venerable Ones, bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening will be the recipients of this perfection of wisdom so deep, so hard to behold, so hard to understand, so peaceful, so sublime, so subtle, so private, so not an object of speculative thought, so brilliant, so absolutely noble, and so much an object to be known by the learned and wise. Persons who have seen the truths, or worthy ones with outflows dried up, or those who have completed their plan, or those who have served well the victors, or those whose wholesome roots have grown under many hundred millions of buddhas, or sons and daughters of good families who have been mentored by spiritual friends also will be the recipients of this perfection of wisdom so deep, so hard to behold, so hard to understand, so peaceful, so sublime, so subtle, so private, so not an object of speculative thought, so brilliant, so absolutely noble, so much an object to be known by the learned and wise.
 “They will not construct the idea that form is empty, and they will not construct the idea that emptiness is form. They will not construct the idea that feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty, and they will not construct the idea that emptiness is consciousness. 
 “They will not construct the idea that form is signless, and they will not construct the idea that signlessness is form. They will not construct the idea that feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is signless, they will not construct the idea that signlessness is consciousness.
 “They will not construct the idea that form is wishless, and they will not construct the idea that wishlessness is form. They will not construct the idea that form does not arise, and they will not construct the idea that nonarising is form. They will not construct the idea that form does not stop, and they will not construct the idea that nonstopping is form. Similarly, they will not construct the idea that form is calm, is not calm, is isolated, and is not isolated.
 “They will not construct the idea that feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is wishless, and they will not construct the idea that wishlessness is consciousness. Similarly, they will not construct the idea that it does not arise, does not stop, is calm, or is isolated. Similarly, they will not construct the idea that the constituents, sense fields, dependent origination, perfections, dharmas on the side of awakening, inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha,  meditative stabilizations, dhāraṇī gateways, and similarly, the result of stream enterer, result of once-returner, result of non-returner, state of a worthy one, or state of a pratyekabuddha are like that either.
 “They will not construct the idea that the knowledge of all aspects is empty, and they will not construct the idea that emptiness is the knowledge of all aspects. They will not construct the idea that the knowledge of all aspects is signless, and they will not construct the idea that signlessness is the knowledge of all aspects. They will not construct the idea that the knowledge of all aspects is wishless, and they will not construct the idea that wishlessness is the knowledge of all aspects. They will not construct the idea that the knowledge of all aspects does not arise, does not stop, is calm, or is isolated.
 “They will not construct the idea that the compounded element is empty, and they will not construct the idea that emptiness is the compounded element. They will not construct the idea that the compounded element is signless,  and they will not construct the idea that signlessness is the compounded element. They will not construct the idea that the compounded element is wishless, and they will not construct the idea that wishlessness is the compounded element. Similarly, they will not construct the idea the compounded element does not arise, does not stop, is calm, or is isolated.
 “They will not construct the idea that the uncompounded element is empty, and they will not construct the idea that emptiness is the uncompounded element. They will not construct the idea that the uncompounded element is signless, and they will not construct the idea that signlessness is the uncompounded element. They will not construct the idea that the uncompounded element is wishless, and they will not construct the idea that wishlessness is the uncompounded element. Similarly, they will not construct the idea the uncompounded element does not arise, does not stop, is calm, or is isolated.
 “Gods, in this way nobody will be a recipient of this perfection of wisdom that is so deep, so absolutely noble, so brilliant, and so much an object to be known by the learned and wise. And why? Because here no Dharma at all is pointed out, explained, or taught, and just as no Dharma at all is pointed out, explained, or taught, so too no being at all will be the recipient of it.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra inquired of venerable Subhūti, “Is it not the case that in this perfection of wisdom the three vehicles—that is, the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the perfect, complete Buddha Vehicle—are taught in detail? Is it not the case that the first production of the thought up until the tenth production of the thought are taught for the assistance of bodhisattva great beings? Is it not the case that the bodhisattva’s path is taught—that is, the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers,  fearlessnesses, and detailed and thorough knowledges; up to the distinct attributes of a buddha? So, is it also not the case that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom will miraculously take birth and appear? So, is it also not the case that they will become those whose clairvoyances naturally do not decline? Is it also not the case that those kinds of wholesome roots on account of which they pass, if they want to, from buddhafield to buddhafield and respect, revere, honor, and worship those lord buddhas—that such wholesome roots that bring that about will flourish? Is it not the case that they will not forget the stream of the Dharma they will listen to, right up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Is it not the case that by way of meditative absorption without distraction they will always be in meditative absorption? And is it not the case that they will become those with an unimpeded confident readiness, an unbroken confident readiness, a meditatively absorbed confident readiness, an appropriate confident readiness, a connected confident readiness, a meaningful confident readiness, and a superior confident readiness that rises above all the world?”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra, exactly so,” replied Subhūti. “It is just as you say. In this perfection of wisdom the three vehicles—that is, the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the perfect, complete Buddha Vehicle—are taught in detail. Connect this in the same way, up to it is taught for the assistance of bodhisattva great beings that they will become those with a superior  confident readiness that rises above all the world. And it is taught, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything. It is taught by way of not apprehending what? It is taught by way of not apprehending a self, up to by way of not apprehending one who knows and one who sees; by way of not apprehending form; by way of not apprehending feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; by way of not apprehending the eyes; by way of not apprehending the ears, nose, tongue, body, or thinking mind; by way of not apprehending the earth element, water element, fire element, wind element, space element, or consciousness element; by way of not apprehending the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom; by way of not apprehending inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; by way of not apprehending the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or eightfold noble path; and by way of not apprehending the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or distinct attributes of a buddha, up to by way of not apprehending the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Venerable Śāriputra then asked venerable Subhūti, “In this perfection of wisdom, why are the three vehicles taught in detail by way of not apprehending anything, up to why  is it taught for the assistance of bodhisattva great beings that they will become those with a superior confident readiness that rises above all the world by way of not apprehending anything?”
 Subhūti replied, “Venerable Śāriputra, it is because of inner emptiness that the three vehicles are taught in detail by way of not apprehending anything. It is because of outer emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature that the three vehicles are taught in detail by way of not apprehending anything. Up to it is because of inner emptiness that it is taught for the assistance of bodhisattva great beings that they will become those with a superior confident readiness that rises above all the world. It is because of outer emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature that it is taught for the assistance of bodhisattva great beings that they will become those with a superior confident readiness that rises above all the world.”
This was the twenty-third chapter, “Hard to Understand,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 24: Unlimited
Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods, to think, “I will magically create flowers in order to worship this rain of Dharma being expounded by the elder Subhūti, and we will strew those flowers near, strew them in front, and strew them around the lord buddhas, the community of bodhisattva great beings, the monks, the elder Subhūti, and the perfection of wisdom.” And it occurred to all the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha class, as many as are stationed in the great billionfold world system, to think, “We will magically create flowers in  order to worship this rain of Dharma being expounded by the elder Subhūti, and will strew those flowers near, strew them in front, and strew them around the lord buddhas, the community of bodhisattva great beings, the monks, the elder Subhūti, and the perfection of wisdom.” Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, and all the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha class, as many as are stationed in the great billionfold world system, did magically create coral tree flowers and strewed them near, strewed them in front, and strewed them around the lord buddhas, the community of bodhisattva great beings, the monks, the elder Subhūti, and the perfection of wisdom. Immediately after Śatakratu, head of the gods, and the gods up to the Akaniṣṭha class had strewed those flowers, they matted together and spread out over the great billionfold world system and stayed there suspended in the sky, a second story of flowers delightful and pleasing to the mind.
 Then it occurred to the elder Subhūti to think, “I have never before in all the abodes of the gods seen flowers issue forth like these the gods have strewed. These flowers the gods have strewed have not grown on branches, have not grown in water, and have not grown in meadows. These flowers have been magically created. These flowers the gods have strewed are mind made; they have not grown on branches.”
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, these flowers are not mind made,  and they have not grown on branches; these flowers have not come about.” 
 Subhūti said, “Kauśika, you say, ‘These flowers are not mind made, have not grown on branches; these flowers have not come about.’ What have not come about, Kauśika, are not flowers.”
 Śatakratu then asked, “Venerable monk Subhūti, is it just these passing flowers that have not come about, or has form also not come about, and have feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness also not come about?” 
 “Kauśika,” replied Subhūti, “it is not just these passing flowers that have not come about. Kauśika, form also has not come about, and what has not come about is not form. Kauśika, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness has not come about, and what has not come about is not consciousness. 
 “Kauśika, the eyes have not come about, and what have not come about are not the eyes. Kauśika, the ears . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . and the thinking mind has not come about, and what has not come about is not thinking mind. 
 “Kauśika, the earth element has not come about, and what has not come about is not the earth element. Kauśika, the water element . . . the fire element . . . the wind element . . . the space element . . . and the consciousness element has not come about, and what has not come about is not the consciousness element. 
 “Kauśika, the perfection of giving has not come about, and what has not come about is not the perfection of giving. Kauśika, the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom has not come about, and what has not come about is not the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Kauśika, inner emptiness has not come about, and what has not come about is not inner emptiness. Kauśika, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature has not come about, and what has not come about is not the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.
 “Kauśika, the applications of mindfulness have not come about, and what have not come about are not the applications of mindfulness. Similarly, Kauśika, the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . and the eightfold noble path has not come about, and what has not come about is not the eightfold noble path. Similarly, Kauśika, the ten powers . . . the four fearlessnesses . . . the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha have not come about, and what have not come about are not the buddhadharmas.
 “Kauśika, the result of stream enterer has not come about, and what has not come about is not the result of stream enterer. Kauśika, the result of once-returner . . . the result of non-returner . . . the state of a worthy one . . . and the state of a pratyekabuddha has not come about, and what has not come about is not the state of a pratyekabuddha. 
 “Kauśika, all-knowledge . . . the knowledge of path aspects . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects has not come about, and what has not come about is not the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Kauśika, a stream enterer . . . a once-returner . . . a non-returner . . . a worthy one . . . a pratyekabuddha . . . and a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha has not come about, and what has not come about is not a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha.”
 Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods, to think, “Yes! The elder Subhūti is profoundly wise in that he does not contradict designation and gives instruction in the true nature of dharmas.”
 Then the Lord said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so! Subhūti is profoundly wise in that he does not contradict designation and gives instruction in the true nature of dharmas.”
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, then asked the Lord, “How does the elder Subhūti not contradict designation and give instruction in the true nature of dharmas?”
 “Kauśika,” the Lord replied, “form is a mere designation, and that mere designation is the true nature of dharmas, so Subhūti gives instruction in it without contradicting it. Kauśika, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is a mere designation, and that mere designation is the true nature of dharmas, so Subhūti does not contradict it and gives instruction in the true nature of dharmas. And why? Because the true nature of dharmas is not contradicted, and what is not contradicted, that the elder Subhūti gives instruction in and that he does not contradict. 
 “Similarly, Kauśika, the constituents and sense fields; and similarly, the perfection of giving . . .  the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom . . . ; and similarly, inner emptiness . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature . . . ; and similarly, the applications of mindfulness . . . the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . the eightfold noble path . . . the ten powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha . . . ; and similarly, the result of stream enterer . . . the result of once-returner . . . the result of non-returner . . . the state of a worthy one . . . and the state of a pratyekabuddha . . . ; and similarly, a stream enterer is a mere designation. Kauśika a once-returner . . . a non-returner . . . a worthy one . . . a pratyekabuddha . . . and a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha is a mere designation, and that mere designation is the true nature of dharmas, so Subhūti, while giving instruction, does not contradict it. And why? Because the true nature of dharmas is not contradicted, and what is not contradicted, that the elder Subhūti gives instruction in and that he does not contradict. Therefore, Kauśika, Subhūti does not contradict designation and he gives instruction in the true nature of dharmas.”
 Subhūti then said, “Exactly so, Kauśika, it is exactly as the Lord has taught—all dharmas are mere designations. Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings, having thus understood how all dharmas are mere designations, should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings training like that  do not train in form, and they do not train in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. And why? Because they do not see the form in which they train, and they do not see the feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness in which they train. 
 “Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings training like that do not train in the perfection of giving. And why? Because they do not see the perfection of giving in which they train. Similarly, they do not train in the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . or the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because they do not see the perfection of wisdom in which they train.
 “They also do not train in inner emptiness, up to they do not train in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. And why? Because they do not see the inner emptiness in which they train, up to they do not see the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.
 “They also do not train in the applications of mindfulness. They also do not train in the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, up to or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They do not train in the result of stream enterer, result of once-returner, result of non-returner, state of a worthy one, or state of a pratyekabuddha. They do not train  in the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because they do not see, up to the knowledge of all aspects in which they train.” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, inquired of venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, why do bodhisattva great beings not see form, and why do bodhisattva great beings not see feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness? Similarly, why do they not see the constituents, sense fields, dependent originations, perfections, emptinesses, or the dharmas on the side of awakening? Why do they not see the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha? Why do they not see . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Kauśika,” replied Subhūti, “it is because form is empty of form, and feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is empty of consciousness. Similarly, the constituents . . . the sense fields . . . the dependent originations . . . the perfections . . . the emptinesses . . . and the dharmas on the side of awakening are empty of the dharmas on the side of awakening. The ten powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of the distinct attributes of a buddha. Up to the knowledge of all aspects is empty of the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because the emptiness of form does not train in the emptiness of form, up to the emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects does not train in the emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Kauśika,  those who do not train in emptiness train in emptiness without making a division into two. They train in the emptiness of form without making a division into two. Similarly, they train in . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects without making a division into two. 
 “Kauśika, those who train in the emptiness of form without making a division into two, and those who train in . . . up to in the knowledge of all aspects without making a division into two, train in the perfection of giving without making a division into two. Similarly, they train in the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom without making a division into two.
 “They train in inner emptiness without making a division into two. They train in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature without making a division into two.
 “They train in the applications of mindfulness without making a division into two. They train in the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path without making a division into two. They train in the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha without making a division into two. They train in the result of stream enterer without making a division into two. They train in the result of once-returner, result of non-returner, state of a worthy one, state of a pratyekabuddha, buddhahood, and the knowledge of all aspects without making a division into two. 
 “Those who train in buddhahood and the knowledge of all aspects without making a division into two train in countless, infinite buddhadharmas. 
 “Those who train in countless, infinite buddhadharmas do not train in order to increase  or decrease form, and they do not train in order to increase or decrease feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Similarly, they do not train in order to increase or decrease the constituents and sense fields, do not train in order to increase or decrease the dependent originations, do not train in order to increase or decrease the perfection of giving, and do not train in order to increase or decrease the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom. They do not train in order to increase or decrease the applications of mindfulness. Similarly, they do not train in order to increase or decrease the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path. They do not train in order to increase or decrease inner emptiness, do not train in order to increase or decrease . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. They do not train in order to increase or decrease the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or knowledge of all aspects.
 “Those who do not train in order to increase or decrease form, up to do not train in order to increase or decrease the knowledge of all aspects are those who do not train in order to get hold of or get rid of form; who do not train in order to get hold of or get rid of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; and, similarly, who do not train in order to get hold of and get rid of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 Śāriputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, why do bodhisattva great beings not train in order to get hold of or get rid of form; not train in order to get hold of or get rid of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; and similarly, not train in order to get hold of or get rid of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “it is because there is no getting hold of form. And why? Because, based on inner emptiness,form does not get hold of form. Venerable Śāriputra, there is no getting hold of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness, either. And why? Because, based on inner emptiness, consciousness does not get hold of consciousness. Venerable Śāriputra, similarly, there is no getting hold of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, based on inner emptiness and outer emptiness, the knowledge of all aspects does not get hold of the knowledge of all aspects. Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings thus training in the perfection of wisdom  by way of not getting hold of all dharmas will go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, will bodhisattva great beings training thus, having trained in the perfection of wisdom, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “bodhisattva great beings training thus will, having trained in the perfection of wisdom by way of not getting hold of all dharmas, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, how will bodhisattva great beings thus training, having trained not in order to get hold of, and not in order to get rid of, all dharmas, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “bodhisattva great beings training in the perfection of wisdom do not see the production and stopping, acceptance and rejection, defilement and purification, or decrease and increase of form. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, form does not exist through an intrinsic nature of form. Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings do not see the production and stopping, acceptance and rejection, defilement and purification, or decrease and increase of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness. And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, consciousness does not exist through an intrinsic nature of consciousness.
 “Similarly, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings do not see the production and stopping, acceptance and rejection, defilement and purification, or decrease and increase of the constituents . . . the sense fields . . . the dependent originations . . . the perfections . . . the dharmas on the side of awakening . . . all the emptinesses . . . the powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . the meditative stabilizations . . . the dhāraṇī gateways . . . the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha . . . or the knowledge of all aspects. And why?  Because, Venerable Śāriputra, the knowledge of all aspects does not exist through an intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings thus training in the nonproduction and nonstopping, nonacceptance and nonrejection, nondefilement and nonpurification, and nondecrease and nonincrease of all dharmas will, training in the perfection of wisdom by way of not training and not going forth, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked venerable Śāriputra, “Venerable monk Śāriputra, where should you look for the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Kauśika,” replied Śāriputra, “you should look for the perfection of wisdom in Subhūti’s chapter.” 
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, then asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, is it through your noble might, is it through your sustaining power that the noble Śāriputra has said, ‘Kauśika, you should look for the perfection of wisdom in Subhūti’s chapter’?” 
 “Kauśika, this is not my sustaining power, it is not my might,” replied Subhūti.
 “Well then, venerable monk Subhūti, whose sustaining power, whose might is it?” asked Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika, this is the Tathāgata’s sustaining power, it is the Tathāgata’s might,” replied Subhūti.
 Śatakratu then asked, “Venerable monk Subhūti, given that all dharmas are without anything that sustains them, why do you say ‘this is the Tathāgata’s sustaining power, it is the Tathāgata’s might’?”
 “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so!” replied Subhūti. “The Tathāgata cannot be apprehended in the true nature of dharmas that is without anything that sustains it,  nor can the Tathāgata be apprehended elsewhere than the true nature of dharmas that is without anything that sustains it. The true nature of dharmas that is without anything that sustains it cannot be apprehended in the Tathāgata, nor can the true nature of dharmas that is without anything that sustains it be apprehended elsewhere than the Tathāgata. 
 “Also, the Tathāgata cannot be apprehended in suchness, and suchness cannot be apprehended in the Tathāgata. The Tathāgata cannot be apprehended in the suchness of form, and the suchness of form cannot be apprehended in the Tathāgata. The Tathāgata cannot be apprehended in the true dharmic nature of form, and the true dharmic nature of form cannot be apprehended in the Tathāgata. The Tathāgata cannot be apprehended in the suchness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness, and the suchness of consciousness cannot be apprehended in the Tathāgata. The Tathāgata cannot be apprehended in the true dharmic nature of consciousness, and the true dharmic nature of consciousness cannot be apprehended in the Tathāgata.
 “Similarly, the Tathāgata cannot be apprehended in the suchness of the constituents, the sense fields, the dependent originations, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the gateways to liberation, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, up to or the knowledge of all aspects, and the suchness of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects cannot be apprehended in the Tathāgata. The Tathāgata cannot be apprehended in the true dharmic nature of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects, and the true dharmic nature of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects cannot be apprehended in the Tathāgata.
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because the true dharmic nature of the Tathāgata  is not conjoined with or disjoined from the true dharmic nature of form. Kauśika, the true dharmic nature of the Tathāgata is not conjoined with or disjoined from the true dharmic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. It is not conjoined with or disjoined from something other than the true dharmic nature of form. It is not conjoined with or disjoined from something other than the true dharmic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. It is not conjoined with or disjoined from the suchness of form. It is not conjoined with or disjoined from the suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. It is not conjoined with or disjoined from something other than the suchness of form. It is not conjoined with or disjoined from something other than the suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. 
 “Similarly, the true dharmic nature of the Tathāgata is not conjoined with or disjoined from the true dharmic nature of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects; it is not conjoined with or disjoined from the suchness of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects; it is not conjoined with or disjoined from something other than the true dharmic nature of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects; and it is not conjoined with or disjoined from something other than the suchness of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Thus, Kauśika, not conjoined with and not disjoined from all dharmas—this is its might, this is its sustaining power, by way of no sustaining power.
 “Kauśika, you asked, ‘Where should bodhisattva great beings look for the perfection of wisdom?’ Kauśika, they should not look for it in form, and they should not look for it  elsewhere than form. They should not look for it in feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness, and they should not look for it elsewhere than consciousness. And why? Kauśika, it is because all dharmas—the perfection of wisdom, form, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness—are not conjoined, are not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should not look for the perfection of wisdom in the constituents . . . the sense fields . . . or the dependent originations. They should not look for it elsewhere than dependent originations. They should not look for it in the perfections . . . all the emptinesses . . . the dharmas on the side of awakening . . . the ten tathāgata powers . . . the fearlessnesses . . . the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. They should not look for it elsewhere than the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because the perfection of wisdom, the knowledge of all aspects, and the looking—all these dharmas are not conjoined, are not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. 
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because form is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than form. Similarly, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness  is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than consciousness. Similarly, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Similarly, the suchness of form is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the suchness of form. The suchness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the suchness of consciousness. The suchness of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects.
 “The true dharmic nature of form is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the true dharmic nature of form. The true dharmic nature of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the true dharmic nature of consciousness. The true dharmic nature of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the true dharmic nature of the knowledge of all aspects.
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because all these dharmas do not exist and cannot be apprehended. And given that all dharmas thus do not exist and cannot be apprehended, form is therefore not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than form. The suchness of form is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the suchness of form. The true dharmic nature of form is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the true dharmic nature of form. 
Connect this in the same way with the knowledge of all aspects is therefore not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the knowledge of all aspects. The suchness of the knowledge of all aspects is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects. The true dharmic nature of the knowledge of all aspects is not the perfection of wisdom, and there is no perfection of wisdom other than the true dharmic nature of the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, this perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is great. Venerable monk Subhūti, this perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is immeasurable. Venerable monk Subhūti, this perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is infinite. Venerable monk Subhūti, this perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is limitless. Having trained in it, stream enterers reached, are reaching, and will reach the result of stream enterer; once-returners . . . non-returners . . . and worthy ones reached, are reaching, and will reach the result of a worthy one; pratyekabuddhas have completely awakened, are completely awakening, and will completely awaken to their awakening; and bodhisattva great beings, having brought beings  to maturity and purified a buddhafield, have completely awakened, are completely awakening, and will completely awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so!” agreed Subhūti. “This perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is great. This perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is immeasurable. This perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is infinite. This perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is limitless. Having trained in it, stream enterers reached, are reaching, and will reach the result of stream enterer; once-returners . . . non-returners . . . and worthy ones reached, are reaching, and will reach the result of a worthy one; pratyekabuddhas have completely awakened, are completely awakening, and will completely awaken to their awakening; and bodhisattva great beings, having brought beings to maturity and purified a buddhafield, have completely awakened, are completely awakening, and will completely awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “And why? Because, Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is great because of the greatness of form. And why? Because, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend a prior limit of form, you cannot apprehend a later limit, and you cannot apprehend a middle. Kauśika,  this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is great because of the greatness of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness. And why? Because, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend a prior limit of consciousness, you cannot apprehend a later limit, and you cannot apprehend a middle. Kauśika, connect this in the same way with each, up to this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is great because of the greatness of the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend a prior limit of the knowledge of all aspects, you cannot apprehend a later limit, and you cannot apprehend a middle. 
 “Kauśika, because of this one of many explanations, this perfection—that is, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings—is great.
 “Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is immeasurable because form is immeasurable. And why? Because, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend a measure of form. For example, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend the measure of space either, and similarly you cannot apprehend the measure of form. Form is immeasurable because space is immeasurable. This perfection of bodhisattva great beings is immeasurable because form is immeasurable. Connect this in the same way with each, up to this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is immeasurable because the knowledge of all aspects is immeasurable. And why? Because, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend a measure of the knowledge of all aspects. For example, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend the measure of space either, and similarly you cannot apprehend the measure of the knowledge of all aspects. The knowledge of all aspects is immeasurable because space is immeasurable. This perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings  is immeasurable because the knowledge of all aspects is immeasurable.
 “Kauśika, because of this one of many explanations this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is immeasurable. 
 “Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is infinite because form is infinite. And why? Because, Kauśika, form cannot be given a size. For example, Kauśika, space cannot be given a size either, and similarly form cannot be given a size. Form cannot be given a size because space cannot be given a size. This perfection of bodhisattva great beings cannot be given a size because form cannot be given a size. And similarly, up to this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is infinite because the knowledge of all aspects is infinite. For example, Kauśika, space cannot be given a size either, and similarly the knowledge of all aspects cannot be given a size. The knowledge of all aspects cannot be given a size because space cannot be given a size. This perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings cannot be given a size because the knowledge of all aspects cannot be given a size.
 “Kauśika, because of this one of many explanations, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is infinite.
 “Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because form is unlimited. And why? Because, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend limits or a middle of form. Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . .  and consciousness is unlimited. And why? Because, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend limits or a middle of consciousness. Kauśika, connect this in the same way for each, up to this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because the knowledge of all aspects is unlimited. And why? Because, Kauśika, you cannot apprehend limits or a middle of the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Kauśika, because of this one of many explanations, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is infinite because form is unlimited, up to because the knowledge of all aspects is unlimited.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because the objective support is unlimited.” 
 The head of the gods then asked, “Venerable monk Subhūti, how is it so that this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because the objective support is unlimited?”
 “Kauśika,” replied Subhūti, “this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because the knowledge of all aspects is unlimited.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because the dharmas that are objective support are unlimited.”
 The head of the gods then asked, “Venerable monk Subhūti, why is this perfection of bodhisattva great beings unlimited because the dharmas that are objective support are unlimited?”
 “Kauśika,” replied Subhūti, “this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because the dharma-constituent is unlimited.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because suchness as objective support is unlimited.”
 The head of the gods then asked,  “Venerable monk Subhūti, why is this perfection of bodhisattva great beings unlimited because suchness as objective support is unlimited?”
 “Kauśika, it is like this,” replied Subhūti. “The objective support is unlimited because suchness is unlimited. Suchness is unlimited because the objective support is unlimited. So, Kauśika, this—namely, the perfection of bodhisattva great beings—is unlimited because the objective support that is suchness is unlimited.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because beings are unlimited.”
 The head of the gods then asked, “Venerable monk Subhūti, why is this perfection of bodhisattva great beings unlimited because beings are unlimited?”
 “What do you think, Kauśika, about this word—that is, being—that is said again and again: what dharma is it for?” asked Subhūti in return.
 The head of the gods replied, “Venerable monk Subhūti, this—that is, the word being—that is said again and again is not a word for a dharma, and it is not a word for a nondharma. It is a name plucked out of thin air; it is given as a designation without any real basis, and it is given as a designation without any objective support.”
 “What do you think, Kauśika,” asked Subhūti, “has there been any elucidation of a being in this perfection of wisdom?”
 “No there has not, venerable monk Subhūti,” answered the head of the gods.
 Subhūti then asked, “Kauśika, where there has been no elucidation of a being, where will there be the limitlessness of a being? Kauśika, if a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha remaining for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River were to say the word being again and again, what do you think, Kauśika,  would any being at all have been born or ceased there?”
 “No, venerable monk Subhūti,” answered the head of the gods. “And why? Because beings are pure from the beginning.” 
 “Kauśika,” said Subhūti, “from this one of many explanations you should know this perfection of bodhisattva great beings is unlimited because beings are unlimited.”
This was the twenty-fourth chapter, “Unlimited,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 25: Second Śatakratu
The women and men and masses of seers, together with the gods—those with the Indras, those with the Brahmās, and those with the Prajāpatis as their leaders—cried out three times cries of delight in the Dharma that the elder Subhūti, through the might of the Tathāgata, through the sustaining power of the Tathāgata, had pointed out, taught, thrown light on, and illuminated: “Ah! How well it has been explained. Ah! How well this Dharma has been explained. Ah! How well the true dharmic nature of this Dharma has been explained.” And they said, “Lord, we shall treat those bodhisattva great beings who do not become separated from the perfection of wisdom, who do not apprehend any dharma, be it form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness, up to or the knowledge of all aspects, but still make known the presentation of the three vehicles—the vehicle of the śrāvakas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, and the vehicle of the perfectly complete buddhas—exactly like tathāgatas.”
 Then the Lord said to those gods, “Exactly so, gods, exactly so. It is exactly as you say. Without apprehending any dharma, be it form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness, up to or the knowledge of all aspects,  still they make known a presentation of the three vehicles—the vehicle of the śrāvakas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, and the vehicle of the perfectly complete buddhas. Gods, you should treat those bodhisattva great beings who do not become separated from the perfection of wisdom, by way of not apprehending anything, exactly like tathāgatas. 
 “And why? It is because all three vehicles—the vehicle of the śrāvakas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, and the Great Vehicle—are expounded in detail in this perfection of wisdom, but without apprehending the Tathāgata as other than the perfection of giving; without apprehending the Tathāgata as other than the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; without apprehending the Tathāgata as other than inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; without apprehending the Tathāgata as other than the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path; without apprehending the Tathāgata as other than the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and without apprehending the Tathāgata as other than . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Gods, it is because bodhisattva great beings train in all those dharmas, the perfection of giving and so on, and because they train in . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects, that you, gods, should therefore call those bodhisattva great beings,  practicing without becoming separated from the perfection of wisdom, just tathāgatas. 
 “When I was staying in the center of commerce in the center of an empire called Padmāvatī, in the presence of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Dīpaṃkara, and I was, by way of not apprehending anything, inseparable from the perfection of giving; inseparable from the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; inseparable from inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; inseparable from the applications of mindfulness; inseparable from the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path; and inseparable from the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇī gateways, the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, great compassion, and infinite other buddhadharmas, at that time, gods, that tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Dīpaṃkara prophesied my unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening: ‘You, brahmin student, in the future after incalculable eons have passed, in the Fortunate Age, right in this world system, will become the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha called Śākyamuni, perfect in knowledge and conduct, a sugata, a knower of worlds, a driver of persons to be tamed, unsurpassed, a teacher of gods and humans,  a buddha, a lord.’ ” 
 Then those gods said to the Lord, “It is amazing, Lord, the extent to which this perfection of wisdom of the bodhisattva great beings is favorable to the knowledge of all aspects through not getting hold of or rejecting form; through not getting hold of or rejecting feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; up to through not getting hold of or rejecting the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then the Lord, knowing the four retinues of monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen, the bodhisattva great beings, the Four Mahārājas and the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha class of gods were assembled and seated, taking them all as witnesses, said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, the Māras or the Māra class of gods will find no way to infiltrate any bodhisattva great being, or any monk, nun, layman, or laywoman, or any son of a good family or daughter of a good family, or any god or goddess who takes up, bears in mind, reads out loud, masters, cultivates, illuminates for others, or properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom without becoming separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because those sons of a good family and those daughters of a good family will have made just the emptiness of form into a good sustainable position, and they will have made just the emptiness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness into a good sustainable position. And why? Because emptiness finds no way to infiltrate emptiness, signlessness finds no way to infiltrate signlessness, and the wishlessness finds no way to infiltrate wishlessness. Similarly, it is because those sons of a good family and those daughters of a good family will have made just the emptiness of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects into a good sustainable position. And why? Because emptiness finds no way to infiltrate emptiness, signlessness finds no way to infiltrate signlessness, and wishlessness finds no way to infiltrate wishlessness. And why? Because they have no intrinsic nature with which they might infiltrate, where infiltration might take place, and into which infiltration might take place.
 “Kauśika, humans and nonhumans too find no way to infiltrate those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family. And why? Because those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family have become very habituated to love, compassion, joy, and equanimity. 
 “Kauśika, those sons of a good family or those daughters of a good family will not die in a distressed state. And why? Because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family practicing the perfection of giving have attended on all beings, serving them perfectly. 
 “Kauśika, those Cāturmahā­rājika gods included in the great billionfold world system, and those Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmakāyika, Ābhāsvara,  Śubhakṛtsna, and Bṛhatphala gods who have produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—those gods who have not heard, not taken up, not borne in mind, not mastered, and not properly paid attention to the perfection of wisdom—are gods who should, without being separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, listen, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to it. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, those sons of a good family or those daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom without being separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects—they, Kauśika, whether they stay in an abandoned house, whether they stay in the open air, or whether they have gone the wrong way, do not get scared or petrified. And why? Because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family have become very habituated to inner emptiness by way of not apprehending anything, have become very habituated to outer emptiness by way of not apprehending anything, up to have become very habituated to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature by way of not apprehending anything.”
 Then the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, up to the Śuddhāvāsa class of gods, as many as are stationed in the great billionfold world system, said to the Lord, “We too will constantly and always arrange for the guarding, protection, and safekeeping of those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who, without being separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, believe in, take up, bear in mind,  read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to just this deep perfection of wisdom. And why? Because, Lord, it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that the hells, the animal world, and the world of Yama are brought to an end, and that all poor gods, all poor humans, all the plagues of famines, all the plagues of headaches, and all hardships and troubles are brought to an end; it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that the ten wholesome actions appear in the world, and the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, perfection of wisdom, inner emptiness and . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature appear in the world; and it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, up to the knowledge of all aspects appear in the world.
 “Furthermore, Lord, it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that great sāla tree–like royal families  appear in the world, great sāla tree–like brahmin families appear in the world, great sāla tree–like business families appear in the world, wheel-turning emperor families appear in the world, Cāturmahā­rājika gods appear in the world, up to and the Akaniṣṭha class of gods appears in the world.
 “Furthermore, Lord, it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that the result of stream enterer appears in the world; that stream enterers appear in the world; that the result of once-returner and once-returners, the result of non-returner and non-returners, and the state of a worthy one and worthy ones appear in the world; and that their own awakening and pratyekabuddhas appear in the world. 
 “It is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that bringing beings to maturity appears in the world; that the purification of a buddhafield appears in the world; that tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas appear in the world; that turning the wheel of Dharma appears in the world; and that the Buddha Jewel appears in the world, the Dharma Jewel appears in the world, and the Saṅgha Jewel appears in the world. 
 “Lord, because of this one of many explanations, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras will arrange for the guarding, protection, and safekeeping of bodhisattva great beings.” 
 Then the Lord said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “It is exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so. It is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that the hells, the animal world,  and the world of Yama are brought to an end, and similarly, up to that the Buddha Jewel, the Dharma Jewel, and the Saṅgha Jewel appear in the world. Therefore, Kauśika, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras should constantly and always show respect for, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, worship, and arrange for the guarding, protection, and safekeeping of bodhisattva great beings. Kauśika, those who have it in mind to show respect for, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, and worship me should have it in mind to show respect for, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, and worship bodhisattva great beings. Therefore, Kauśika, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras should constantly and always show respect for, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, worship, and arrange for the guarding, protection, and safekeeping of bodhisattva great beings.
 “To illustrate, Kauśika, if this great billionfold world system were filled with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas like a thicket of sugarcane, or a thicket of naḍa reeds, or a thicket of bamboo, or a thicket of rushes, or a thicket of rice, or a thicket of sesame, and were a certain son of a good family or daughter of a good family to show respect for, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, and worship them for as long as they lived with all they required, still, were someone to show respect for, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, and worship just a single bodhisattva who had produced the first thought of awakening and was not separated from the six perfections, then just that would produce much greater merit than the former. And why? Kauśika, it is because it is not thanks to śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas that bodhisattva great beings  and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas appear in the world; rather, it is thanks to the bodhisattva great beings that śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas appear in the world. Therefore, Kauśika, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras should constantly and always show respect for, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, worship, and arrange for the guarding, protection, and safekeeping of bodhisattva great beings.”
This was the twenty-fifth chapter, “Second Śatakratu,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 26: Getting Hold
Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to the Lord, “It is amazing, Lord, how these bodhisattva great beings who have taken up or borne in mind or read aloud or mastered or properly paid attention to this perfection of wisdom in this very life get hold of good qualities; how they bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield, and pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to attend on the lord buddhas; how, if they still want to revere, demonstrate reverence for, show honor to, and worship those lord buddhas on account of wholesome roots, those wholesome roots establish it accordingly; how they go into the presence of those lord buddhas and listen to the Dharma; how they never forget their Dharma right up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening;  how they take possession of a perfect family, perfect celebrity, a perfect life, a perfect retinue, perfect major marks, perfect radiance, perfect eyes, a perfect voice, perfect concentration, and perfect dhāraṇī; how they go from world system to world system where the lord buddhas have not appeared and with skillful means magically produce themselves in the shape a buddha assumes; how they speak in praise of the perfection of giving and speak in praise of the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; how they speak in praise of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; how they speak in praise of the concentrations, speak in praise of the immeasurables and formless absorptions, speak in praise of the applications of mindfulness, and speak in praise of the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; how they speak in praise of the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and how with skillful means they tame beings in the three vehicles—the Śrāvaka Vehicle, Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and Great Vehicle—teaching them the Dharma.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, also said to the Lord,  “It is amazing, Lord, how these bodhisattva great beings who have taken possession of this perfection of wisdom have also taken possession of all the five other perfections as well and, similarly, how they have taken possession of all the dharmas on the side of awakening, all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇī gateways, all the emptinesses, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, up to and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; how they have taken possession of the result of stream enterer and how they have taken possession of the result of once-returner, result of non-returner, state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, up to and the knowledge of all aspects; and how, Lord, those who have taken possession of this perfection of wisdom have taken possession of all the buddhadharmas.” 
 Then the Lord said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “It is exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so. By taking possession of this perfection of wisdom they have also taken possession of all the other five perfections as well, and similarly have taken possession of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, listen well and hard and pay attention, and I will explain to you the good qualities that sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will obtain in this very life if they have taken up, borne in mind, read aloud, mastered, and properly paid attention to this perfection of wisdom.”
 “I will do so, Lord,” said Śatakratu, head of the gods, and he listened to the Lord. 
 The Lord said,  “Even if certain tīrthika religious mendicants, Māras, gods of the Māra class, or persons with unfounded conceit want to fight, want to dissuade, want to argue with, or want to contradict bodhisattva great beings, or sons of a good family or daughters of a good family, their wish to fight, wish to dissuade, wish to argue, and wish to contradict die down extremely quickly, and the intentions of those who want to fight, want to dissuade, want to argue, and want to contradict are not fulfilled. And why? Kauśika, it is because bodhisattva great beings practicing for a long time the perfection of giving, practicing the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom always forsake those inner and outer dharmas on account of which beings for a long time have been fighting, dissuading, arguing, and contradicting, and they have established them in the perfection of giving. It is because bodhisattva great beings always forsake those inner and outer dharmas on account of which beings for a long time have been immoral, and have established beings in the perfection of morality; it is because bodhisattva great beings always forsake those inner and outer dharmas on account of which beings for a long time have been battling, fighting, and arguing, and they have established beings in the perfection of patience; it is because bodhisattva great beings always forsake those inner and outer dharmas  on account of which beings for a long time have become lazy, and they have established beings in the perfection of perseverance; it is because bodhisattva great beings always forsake those inner and outer dharmas on account of which beings for a long time have become distracted, and they have established beings in the perfection of concentration; and it is because bodhisattva great beings always forsake those inner and outer dharmas on account of which beings for a long time have become intellectually confused, and they have established beings in and inspired them to take up the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings, after having removed with skillful means attachment, rage, and obsession—the attachment, rage, and obsession on account of which beings have streamed through cyclic existences for a long time—have established them in and inspired them to take up the four concentrations; have inspired them to take up the four immeasurables and formless absorptions; have established them in and inspired them to take up the four applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, the eightfold noble path, the three emptiness, signless, and wishless gateways to liberation, the meditative stabilizations, and the dhāraṇī gateways; have established them in and inspired them to take up the ten tathāgata powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and have established them in and inspired them to take up the result of stream enterer, the result  of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. Because of this, Kauśika, when bodhisattva great beings practice a bodhisattva’s practice, all of these good qualities and benefits will come about in this very life, and in a future life they will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, turn the wheel of the Dharma, and, having established beings as they vowed to do, enter into complete nirvāṇa, into the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. These, Kauśika, are the good qualities and benefits that will come about in a future life. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, on that place on the earth where a son of a good family or a daughter of a good family will take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom, there on that place on the earth different tīrthika religious mendicants, Māras, gods of the Māra class, or persons with unfounded conceit cannot cause any disturbance in order to fight, argue against it, contradict it, or make it die out. 
 “On top of that, such good qualities and benefits as these will come about for them as well: by listening to this perfection of wisdom they will gradually go forth by way of the three vehicles and bring an end to suffering. 
 “To illustrate, Kauśika, there is a medicinal herb called maghī that gives relief from all poisons. In regard to this, a poisonous snake, a living thing seized with hunger, seeking food, sees some living creature. It wants to eat that creature and pursues that creature, following after it. Then that creature, scared out of its wits, terrified of dying,  runs to where there is the medicinal herb called maghī, and that poisonous snake, having sensed the smell of that medicinal herb, turns back. And why? Because such are the medicinal properties of that maghī herb that it suppresses all the venom of the poisonous snake. Kauśika, such is the power of the medicinal herb called maghī. Similarly, Kauśika, if any son of a good family or daughter of a good family takes up or bears in mind or reads out loud or masters or properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom, even though fighting, dissuading, arguing, or contradicting it might happen, still, because of the grandeur of the perfection of wisdom and the power of the perfection of wisdom, it is calmed and dies down extremely quickly. Wherever they arise they die down right there, and they do not increase. 
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because this perfection of wisdom is something that calms down all wrong unwholesome dharmas; it is not something that increases them. Which wrong unwholesome dharmas does it calm down and not increase? It calms down and does not increase these: greed, hatred, confusion, ignorance, volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, and old age and death, pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief—simply this great heap of suffering. It calms down and does not increase obscurations, hindrances, attachments, proclivities, snares, the view of a self, and the view of a being, of a living being, of a person, up to the view of one who knows and of one who sees, the view of permanence, the view of annihilation, the view of existence, and the view of nonexistence, up to every instance of a view,  as well as envy, immorality, malice, laziness, distraction, and intellectual confusion; the perception of permanence, perception of happiness, perception of self, and perception of beauty; the operations of craving; grasping at form; grasping at feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; grasping at the perfection of giving, and grasping at the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; grasping at inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; grasping at the applications of mindfulness, and grasping at the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; grasping at the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; grasping at all-knowledge and the knowledge of path aspects; grasping at the knowledge of all aspects; and grasping at nirvāṇa. 
 “Kauśika, the Mahārājas, the Lokapālas, the Devas, the Śatakratus, heads of the gods, the Brahmās, the Sahāṃpati Brahmās, up to the Akaniṣṭha class of gods stationed in this great billionfold world system will constantly and always arrange for the guarding, protection, and safekeeping of those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who take up or bear in mind or read aloud or master or properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom.
 “Kauśika,  the lord buddhas who dwell and maintain themselves in world systems in the ten directions will constantly and always arrange for the guarding, protection, and safekeeping of those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who take up or bear in mind or read aloud or master or properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom. Thus their unwholesome dharmas will be reduced, and their wholesome dharmas will increase—that is, by way of not apprehending anything the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom increase and do not decrease; by way of not apprehending anything inner emptiness increases and does not decrease, up to by way of not apprehending anything the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature increases and does not decrease; by way of not apprehending anything the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path increase and do not decrease; by way of not apprehending anything the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha increase and do not decrease; by way of not apprehending anything all the meditative stabilizations and all the dhāraṇī gateways increase and do not decrease; up to and by way of not apprehending anything the knowledge of all aspects increases and does not decrease. 
 “Theirs is polite speech and measured speech,  not unbridled speech. They are not overcome with rage, not overcome by conceit, and not overcome by miserliness, and they do not become envious. 
 “They personally stop killing, they inspire others to stop killing, they speak in praise of stopping killing, and they speak in praise of others stopping killing as well, welcoming it.
 “They personally stop stealing, they inspire others to stop stealing, they speak in praise of stopping stealing, and they speak in praise of others stopping stealing as well, welcoming it.
 “They personally stop illicit sex because of lust, they inspire others to stop illicit sex because of lust, they speak in praise of stopping illicit sex because of lust, and they speak in praise of others stopping illicit sex because of lust as well, welcoming it.
 “They personally stop lying, they inspire others to stop lying, they speak in praise of stopping lying, and they speak in praise of others stopping lying as well, welcoming it. Similarly, they personally stop backbiting, insulting, and babbling nonsense; they inspire others to stop backbiting, insulting, and babbling nonsense; they speak in praise of stopping backbiting, insulting, and babbling nonsense; and they speak in praise of others stopping backbiting, insulting, and babbling nonsense as well, welcoming it.
 “They personally stop coveting, malice, and wrong view; they inspire others to stop coveting, malice, and wrong view; they speak in praise of stopping coveting, malice, and wrong view; and they speak in praise of others stopping coveting, malice, and wrong view as well,  welcoming it.
 “They personally stand in the perfection of giving, they inspire others to engage in the perfection of giving, they speak in praise of the perfection of giving, and they speak in praise of others practicing the perfection of giving as well, welcoming it. Similarly, they personally stand in the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom, they inspire others to engage in the perfection of wisdom, they speak in praise of the perfection of wisdom, and they speak in praise of others practicing the perfection of wisdom as well, welcoming it.
 “They personally meditate on inner emptiness, they inspire others to engage with inner emptiness, they speak in praise of inner emptiness, and they speak in praise of others meditating on inner emptiness as well, welcoming it. Similarly, they personally meditate on . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, they inspire others to engage with . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, they speak in praise of . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and they speak in praise of others meditating on . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature as well, welcoming it.
 “They personally become absorbed in all the meditative stabilizations, they inspire others to become absorbed in all the meditative stabilizations, they speak in praise of becoming absorbed in all the meditative stabilizations, and they speak in praise of others become absorbed in all the meditative stabilizations as well, welcoming it.
 “They personally obtain the dhāraṇīs, they inspire others  to obtain dhāraṇīs, they speak in praise of obtaining dhāraṇīs, and they speak in praise of others obtaining dhāraṇīs as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally become absorbed in the first concentration, they inspire others to become absorbed in the first concentration, they speak in praise of abiding having become absorbed in the first concentration, and they speak in praise of others abiding having become absorbed in the first concentration as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally become absorbed in the second concentration . . . the third concentration . . . and the fourth concentration, they inspire others to become absorbed in the fourth concentration, they speak in praise of becoming absorbed in the fourth concentration, and they speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in the fourth concentration as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally become absorbed in loving-kindness, they inspire others to become absorbed in loving-kindness, they speak in praise of becoming absorbed in loving-kindness, and they speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in loving-kindness as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally become absorbed in compassion, joy, and equanimity, they inspire others to become absorbed in compassion, joy, and equanimity . . . they speak in praise of becoming absorbed in equanimity, and they speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in equanimity as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally become absorbed in the station of endless space . . . the station of endless consciousness . . . the station of nothing-at-all . . . and the station of neither perception nor nonperception, they inspire others to become absorbed  in the station of neither perception nor nonperception, they speak in praise of becoming absorbed in the station of neither perception nor nonperception, and they speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in the station of neither perception nor nonperception as well, welcoming it.
 “They personally cultivate the four applications of mindfulness, they inspire others to cultivate the applications of mindfulness, they speak in praise of cultivating the applications of mindfulness, and they speak in praise of others cultivating the applications of mindfulness as well, welcoming it. 
 “Similarly, they personally cultivate the four right efforts . . . the four legs of miraculous power . . . the five faculties . . . the five powers . . . the seven limbs of awakening . . . and the eightfold noble path, they inspire others to cultivate the eightfold noble path, they speak in praise of cultivating the eightfold noble path, and they speak in praise of others cultivating the eightfold noble path as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally cultivate the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations, they inspire others to cultivate the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations, they speak in praise of cultivating the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations, and they speak in praise of others cultivating the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally cultivate the eight deliverances, they inspire others to cultivate the eight deliverances, they speak in praise of cultivating the eight deliverances, and they speak in praise of others cultivating the eight deliverances as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally cultivate the nine serial absorptions,  they inspire others to cultivate the nine serial absorptions, they speak in praise of cultivating the nine serial absorptions, and they speak in praise of others cultivating the nine serial absorptions as well, welcoming it. 
 “They personally cultivate the ten tathāgata powers . . . the four fearlessnesses . . . the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha . . . and the natural state not robbed of mindfulness . . . and they personally gain the knowledge of all aspects, inspire others to gain the knowledge of all aspects, speak in praise of gaining the knowledge of all aspects, and speak in praise of others gaining the knowledge of all aspects as well, welcoming it. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, all the gifts that bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections give they make into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate, by way of not apprehending anything, to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Similarly, all the morality they protect, the patience they cultivate, the perseverance at which they exert themselves, the concentration they generate, and the wisdom they cultivate they make into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate, by way of not apprehending anything, to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family practicing the six perfections have these sorts of mindfulness: ‘If I do not give gifts I will be born in poor families, I will not bring beings to maturity, I will not purify a buddhafield, and I will not gain the knowledge of all aspects.’ They think, ‘If I do not protect morality I will open the gates to the three terrible forms of life, I will not be born as a god or a human being and I will not bring beings to maturity or purify a buddhafield, so then how could I ever gain  the knowledge of all aspects?’ They think, ‘If I do not cultivate patience my sense faculties will be deficient, my countenance will have a shadow, and I will not obtain the perfect form—the perfect form with which, the moment they see me practicing the bodhisattva way of life, beings become assured of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. If I do not obtain that perfect form, I will not bring beings to maturity or purify a buddhafield, so how could I ever gain the knowledge of all aspects?’ They think, ‘If I become lazy and do not make a vigorous attempt at this path of a bodhisattva, if I do not cultivate it, how could I ever complete the buddhadharmas and how could I ever gain the knowledge of all aspects?’ They think, ‘If I become mentally distracted and I do not train in order to perfect all the meditative stabilizations, I will not bring beings to maturity and will not purify a buddhafield, so how could I ever gain the knowledge of all aspects?’ And they think, ‘If I become intellectually confused I will not train with wisdom and skillful means, I will not transcend the śrāvaka and the pratyekabuddha levels, I will not bring beings to maturity, and I will not purify a buddhafield. How then could I ever fully awaken to the knowledge of all aspects?’ 
 “And they think, ‘Thus I will train perfectly. It would not be right for me not to complete the perfection of giving  because of the force of miserliness, not to complete the perfection of morality because of the force of immorality, not to complete the perfection of patience because of the force of malice, not to complete the perfection of perseverance because of the force of laziness, not to complete the perfection of concentration because of the force of distraction, and not to complete the perfection of wisdom because of the force of intellectual confusion, because, unless I complete the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom, I will not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.’
 “Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up or bear in mind or read aloud or master or properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom, not separated from the knowledge of all aspects, will obtain good qualities and benefits like these in this life and in future lives.” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to the Lord, “It is amazing, Lord, how this perfection of wisdom has been made available in order to tame the bodhisattva great beings and in order to lessen their conceit.” 
 “Why has this perfection of wisdom been made available in order to tame the bodhisattva great beings and in order to lessen their conceit?” asked the Lord.
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, replied to the Lord, “Lord, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the ordinary perfection of giving without skillful means give a gift to the lord buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the pratyekabuddhas,  or the śrāvakas it occurs to them to think, ‘I am giving a gift to the lord buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the pratyekabuddhas, the śrāvakas, or to those who are pitiful, destitute, begging, and seeking shelter.’ Because of that giving they come to feel conceited.
 “When those bodhisattvas protect ordinary morality without skillful means, they think, ‘I am practicing the perfection of morality; I will complete the perfection of morality.’ Because of that morality they come to feel conceited.
 “Similarly, they think, ‘I am practicing the perfection of patience . . . , I am practicing the perfection of perseverance . . . , I am practicing the perfection of concentration . . . , I am practicing the perfection of wisdom.’ Because of that ordinary perfection of wisdom they come to feel conceited.
 “When they cultivate the ordinary applications of mindfulness . . . without skillful means they think, ‘I am cultivating the applications of mindfulness; I am cultivating the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; I am cultivating the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations; I am cultivating all the meditative stabilizations and all the dhāraṇī gateways; I am cultivating the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and I am bringing beings to maturity, I am purifying a buddhafield, and I am going to gain  the knowledge of all aspects.’ 
 “They come to feel conceited because of settling down on grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine.’ In this case, Lord, because bodhisattva great beings practicing all ordinary dharmas settle down on grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine,’ this perfection of wisdom has not been made available to them in order to tame and in order to lessen their conceit . 
 “Lord, here, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the extraordinary dharmas give a gift, they do not apprehend a giver, they do not apprehend something being given, and they do not apprehend a recipient. In this case the perfection of wisdom has been made available in order to tame bodhisattva great beings and in order to lessen their conceit .
 “Similarly, when they protect morality . . . cultivate patience . . . make an attempt at perseverance . . . cultivate concentration . . . and cultivate wisdom, they do not apprehend wisdom, they do not apprehend somebody with wisdom, and they do not apprehend the dharmas.
 “Similarly, they do not apprehend the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or eightfold noble path; they do not apprehend the cultivation of the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and similarly, they do not apprehend the cultivation of great love and great compassion, and they do not apprehend the cultivation of the knowledge of all aspects. So, in this case, Lord, the perfection of wisdom has been made available in order to bring discipline to bodhisattva great beings and in order to lessen their conceit.”
This was the twenty-sixth chapter,  “Getting Hold,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 27: Reliquary
Then the Lord said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, if some son of a good family or daughter of a good family takes up or bears in mind or reads out loud or recites or teaches or intones or harmonizes with or properly pays attention to this deep perfection of wisdom, and if they go up to the front line of battle and have engaged in or are engaging in, or are traversing, or are sitting down or standing up in a battle that is underway, Kauśika, even if an arrow or a club or a stick or a stone or a sword is flung at that son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up or bears in mind or reads out loud or recites or teaches or intones or harmonizes with or properly pays attention to this deep perfection of wisdom, it is impossible that those projectiles would land on their body; it is impossible that the attacks of others would interfere with their life. And why? Kauśika, it is because that son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has practiced the perfection of wisdom for a long time has vanquished their own greed arrows and greed swords; they have vanquished others’ greed arrows and greed swords; they have vanquished their own hatred arrows and confusion arrows and their hatred swords and confusion swords; they have vanquished others’ hatred arrows and confusion arrows and hatred swords and confusion swords; they have vanquished their own arrows of instances of views and swords of instances of views, and they have vanquished others’ arrows of instances of views and swords of instances of views; they have vanquished their own obsession  arrows and obsession swords, and they have vanquished others’ obsession arrows and obsession swords; and they have vanquished their own proclivity arrows and proclivity swords, and they have vanquished others’ proclivity arrows and proclivity swords. Kauśika, because of this one of many explanations, even if an arrow or a sword is flung at a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, it does not land on their body.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, if someone throws non-medicine at, casts a harmful spell on, prepares a fire pit for, strikes with a weapon, gives poison to drink to, or attempts to drown a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, recites, masters, and properly pays attention to this deep perfection of wisdom without being separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, none of these will have any effect on them. And why? Kauśika, it is because this perfection of wisdom is a great knowledge-mantra; Kauśika, this perfection of wisdom is an unsurpassed knowledge-mantra; Kauśika, this perfection of wisdom is a knowledge-mantra equal to the unequaled, and, Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family training in it are not thinking about harm to themselves, are not thinking about harm to others, and are not thinking about harm to both, either. 
 “And why? Because they do not apprehend self, do not apprehend other, and do not apprehend both; they do not apprehend form, and they do not apprehend feelings, perceptions, volitional factors, or consciousness; they do not apprehend the constituents, the sense fields, the dependent originations, the perfections, the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side  of awakening, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the buddhadharmas, up to or even the knowledge of all aspects. And because they are not apprehending anything, they are not thinking about harm to themselves, they are not thinking about harm to others, and they are not thinking about harm to both. They reach unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and gaze down upon all beings. 
 “And why? Because past tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas trained in this knowledge-mantra and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas will, having trained in this perfection of wisdom, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in the future; and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas presently in world systems in the ten directions are fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, having trained in this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, a human or nonhuman looking for a way to infiltrate does not find a way to infiltrate where this perfection of wisdom is written out or borne in mind, even if it is not taken up, not read aloud, not recited from memory, not mastered, and not properly paid attention to. And why? Because in order to worship this perfection of wisdom all the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, the Trāyastriṃśa, up to the Akaniṣṭha class of gods stationed in this great billionfold world system, and all the Cāturmahā­rājika gods,  the Trāyastriṃśa, up to the Akaniṣṭha class of gods stationed in infinite countless world systems constantly and always guard, protect, and keep safe those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family; and wherever this perfection of wisdom has been written out and borne in mind those gods come and show respect to this perfection of wisdom, and they honor, revere, and worship it there and, having worshiped it, take their leave. Kauśika, given that even someone who writes out or bears in mind this perfection of wisdom gets such good qualities and benefits as this in this life, what need is there to say that those who, having written out this perfection of wisdom, take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, recite it from memory, master it, and properly pay attention to it do so? 
 “To illustrate, Kauśika, humans or nonhumans cannot inflict violence or injury on any creature born in the birthplace of a human being or an animal that has gone to the site of awakening, or into the vicinity of the site of awakening, or inside the site of awakening. And why? Because seated there, earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and present and future tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas are fully awakening and will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening there too. Having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening they establish all beings in fearlessness, freedom from enmity, freedom from harming, and freedom from hostility. Having established all beings in fearlessness, freedom from enmity, freedom from harming, and freedom from hostility, they establish infinite, countless beings in the perfect state of gods and humans; in the result  of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, and the result of non-returner; in the state of a worthy one; in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; and in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Kauśika, it is because this very perfection of wisdom makes that place serve as a reliquary for all beings, suitable to be worshiped, honored, revered, and venerated with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners.”
 Having said this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to the Lord, “A certain son of a good family or daughter of a good family, having borne in mind the perfection of wisdom written out in book form, respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners. Someone else deposits the physical remains of a tathāgata, worthy one, perfect, complete buddha who has passed into nirvāṇa in a reliquary and, having deposited them there, looks after and bears them in mind and respects, reveres, honors, and worships them with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners. Which of them makes the greater merit?”
 Śatakratu, head of the gods having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “So, Kauśika, here I will pose a counterquestion right to you. You should answer to the extent you can. What path do you think  a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha, who has acquired the knowledge of all aspects and for whom such a tathāgata’s body has come into being, has trained in, in order to awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, in order to acquire the knowledge of all aspects, and for such a tathāgata’s body to come into being?”
 The Lord having asked this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, answered him, “Lord, a body like this has come into being for a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha, who, having trained in just this perfection of wisdom, has awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and acquired the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so,” said the Lord. “A body like this has come into being for a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha, who, having trained in just this perfection of wisdom, has awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and acquired the knowledge of all aspects. Therefore, Kauśika, a tathāgata is not counted a ‘tathāgata’ because of acquiring such a body as this; a tathāgata is counted a ‘tathāgata’ because of acquiring the knowledge of all aspects. The knowledge of all aspects has come forth, Kauśika, from the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, acquiring such a tathāgata’s physical body has come forth from the perfection of wisdom as well, so it serves as a support for the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. Based on that support the existence of the knowledge of a knower of all aspects is established, and from the existence of the knowledge of a knower of all aspects,  the existence of the Buddha is established, the existence of the Dharma is established, and the existence of the Saṅgha is established. Thus, acquiring this body serves as a support for the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, and it is because it serves as such a support that it serves as a reliquary for all beings, suitable to be venerated, honored, worshiped, respected, revered, and attended to. So too will those physical remains of mine be worshiped when I have passed into nirvāṇa. 
 “Therefore, Kauśika, any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who, having borne respectfully in mind this perfection of wisdom written out in book form just by respecting, revering, honoring, worshiping, venerating, and attending to it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and bannersand with manifold other kinds of worship produces far greater merit than that. And why? Because, Kauśika, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family would have made an offering to the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. When any son of a good family or daughter of a good family has written out in book form this perfection of wisdom and respects, reveres, honors, worships, venerates, and attends to it, just that produces far greater merit than that. And why? Because they would have made an offering to the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, and because the five other perfections issue forth from it; because inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, and the path, the ten powers,  the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha issue forth from it; because all the meditative stabilizations and all the dhāraṇī gateways issue forth from it; because bringing beings to maturity issues forth from it; because the purification of a buddhafield also issues forth from it; because the perfect family, perfect enjoyments, and perfect retinue of bodhisattva great beings also issue forth from it; because great love and great compassion issue forth from it; because great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and great sāla tree–like business families also issue forth from it; because the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to Akaniṣṭha class of gods also issue forth from it; because stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas issue forth from it; because bodhisattva great beings also issue forth from it; because tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas also issue forth from it; and because the knowledge of all aspects issues forth from it too.” 
Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, inquired of the Lord, “Lord, is it that those human beings of Jambudvīpa who do not respect, do not revere, do not honor, do not worship, do not venerate, and do not attend to this perfection of wisdom with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners do not realize there is such a great benefit when the perfection of wisdom  is worshiped, such a great power when the perfection of wisdom is worshiped?”
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, having thus inquired, the Lord asked him in return, “What do you think, Kauśika, from among the human beings of Jambudvīpa, how many are endowed with an unbreakable faith in the Buddha, are endowed with an unbreakable faith in the Dharma and Saṅgha, are not unsure about the Buddha, and are not unsure about the Dharma and Saṅgha, with an unquestioned certainty about the Buddha and with an unquestioned certainty about the Dharma and Saṅgha?”
 The Lord having asked this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to him, “From among the human beings of Jambudvīpa, few are endowed with an unbreakable faith in the Buddha, are endowed with an unbreakable faith in the Dharma and Saṅgha, are not unsure about the Buddha, and are not unsure about the Dharma and Saṅgha, with an unquestioned certainty about the Buddha, and with an unquestioned certainty about the Dharma and Saṅgha.”
 “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so,” said the Lord. “From among the human beings of Jambudvīpa, few are endowed with an unbreakable faith in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. Even fewer than them are those who resort to the ten wholesome actions; even fewer than them are those who apply themselves to cultivating giving and morality; even fewer than them are those who cultivate the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; even fewer than them are those who cultivate the three gateways to liberation; even fewer than them are those who cultivate the eight deliverances; and even fewer than them are those who cultivate the nine serial absorptions. Similarly, there are even fewer who cultivate the four detailed and thorough knowledges  and six clairvoyances.
 “Kauśika, from among the human beings of Jambudvīpa, how many have reached stream enterer because of eliminating the three fetters; once-returner because of weakening greed, hatred, and confusion; non-returner because of eliminating the five fetters that are associated with the lower realms; or worthy one because of eliminating the five fetters that are associated with the upper realms? From among the human beings of Jambudvīpa, how many have set out in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and from among the human beings of Jambudvīpa, how many have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?” 
 “Lord,” replied Śatakratu, “from among the human beings of Jambudvīpa, few are those who resort to the ten wholesome actions. Connect this in the same way with each, up to extremely few are those who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” 
 “Exactly so, Kauśika,” said the Lord. “It is just as you say. Fewer than them are those who practice for awakening. And why? Because those streaming through cyclic existence have not seen the Buddha, have not listened to the Dharma, and have not attended on the Saṅgha. They have not given gifts, have not been devoted to morality, have not cultivated wisdom, have not heard about the perfection of giving, have not heard about the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom, and have not heard about inner emptiness, up to not heard about the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. They have not heard about the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; they have not heard about and have not cultivated the meditative stabilizations, dhāraṇī gateways, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; up to and they have not heard about and have not cultivated the knowledge of all aspects. For that reason, Kauśika, from among the human beings of Jambudvīpa, few are endowed with an unbreakable faith in the Buddha. Connect this in the same way with each, up to few are those who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Even fewer than them are those who practice for awakening; fewer than them are those who produce the thought of awakening; fewer than them are those who do the yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom; fewer than them are those who do the practice of the perfection of wisdom; fewer than them are those who stand on the irreversible level; and fewer even than them are those who will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Kauśika, here with my unobscured buddha eye I see in the eastern direction infinite, countless beings who have produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and are practicing the perfection of wisdom, but among them I see only one or two bodhisattvas standing on the irreversible level. Most, without skillful means, are standing at the śrāvaka level and at the pratyekabuddha level. And why? Kauśika, it is because it is hard for those who are lazy, deficient in perseverance, deficient in fortitude, with an admiration for the deficient, and intellectually confused to accomplish unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Similarly, with my unobscured buddha eye I see in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, northwestern directions, below and above, infinite, countless beings who have produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and are practicing the perfection of wisdom, but among them only one or two bodhisattvas standing on the irreversible level. Most, without skillful means, are standing at the śrāvaka level and at the pratyekabuddha level. And why? Kauśika, it is because it is hard for those who are lazy, deficient in perseverance, deficient in fortitude, with an admiration for the deficient, and intellectually confused  to accomplish unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Therefore, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who wants to quickly and easily awaken fully to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should constantly listen to, take up, bear in mind, recite, master, set in motion, inquire about, and pay proper attention to just this perfection of wisdom, and they should respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. They should also take up, bear in mind, recite, master, and pay proper attention to all the other wholesome dharmas included in the perfection of wisdom—that is, the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration; inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇī gateways, the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, and the eightfold noble path; the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and great love and great compassion. They should also take up, bear in mind, recite, master, and pay proper attention to all the other infinite buddhadharmas included in the perfection of wisdom.
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will understand,  ‘Tathāgatas training in this perfection of wisdom also trained in the perfection of wisdom, perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving; in inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; in all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇī gateways, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; in great love and great compassion; and in all the other infinite buddhadharmas, so we too should follow them in training in this perfection of wisdom. This perfection of wisdom is our teacher.’ Therefore, Kauśika, whether the Tathāgata remains or passes into nirvāṇa, bodhisattva great beings fall back on just this perfection of wisdom.” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked the Lord, “How much merit does a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who worships this perfection of wisdom create?” 
 “Kauśika,” said the Lord, “were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family to direct that a stūpa be made of the seven precious stones for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa, and, having done so, were they to respect, revere, honor, and worship it with divine flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners for as long as they lived, what do you think, Kauśika, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit based on that?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,”  replied Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” said the Lord, “were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, inseparable from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, to take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, illuminate for others, and pay proper attention to just this perfection of wisdom, and, having written it out, were they to respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, they would create even more merit than that. 
 “Kauśika, let alone a stūpa made of the seven precious stones, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, to fill up this Jambudvīpa with stūpas, all of them a yojana in height, for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa, and, having done so, were they to respect, revere, honor, worship, venerate, and attend to them with divine flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, what do you think, Kauśika, based on that would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create even more merit than that?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” said the Lord, “were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, inseparable from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, to take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, illuminate for others, and pay proper attention to just this perfection of wisdom, and, having written it out, were they to respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes,  parasols, flags, and banners, and with manifold other kinds of worship, they would create even more merit than that. 
 “Kauśika, let alone this Jambudvīpa filled with stūpas of a tathāgata, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, to fill up this four-continent world system with stūpas made of the seven precious stones, all of them a yojana in height, for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa, and were they to respect, revere, honor, worship, venerate, and attend to them with divine flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, what do you think, Kauśika, based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” said the Lord, “were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, inseparable from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, to take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, illuminate for others, and pay proper attention to just this perfection of wisdom, and were they, having done nothing but make it into a book, to respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, they would create even more merit than that. 
 “Kauśika, let alone this four-continent world system filled with stūpas of a tathāgata, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika,  to fill up this thousandfold world system with stūpas made of the seven precious stones, all of them a yojana in height, for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa, and, having filled them, were they to respect, revere, honor, worship, venerate, and attend to them with divine flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, what do you think, Kauśika, based on that would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” said the Lord, “were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, inseparable from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, having done nothing but write out and make this perfection of wisdom into a book, to take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, illuminate for others, and pay proper attention to it, and were they to respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, they would create even more merit than that. 
 “Kauśika, let alone this thousandfold world system filled with stūpas made of the seven precious stones, were some person, Kauśika, to cause this millionfold world system to be filled up with stūpas made of the seven precious stones, all of them a yojana in height, for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa, and, having done so, were they to respect, revere, honor, and worship them with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners,  what do you think, Kauśika, based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” said the Lord, “were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, inseparable from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, to do nothing but make this perfection of wisdom into a book and respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, they would create even more merit than that. 
 “Kauśika, let alone even this millionfold world system filled with stūpas made of the seven precious stones, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, to fill this great billionfold world system with stūpas made of the seven precious stones, all of them a yojana in height, for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa, and, having filled it, were that son of a good family or daughter of a good family to respect, revere, honor, and worship them with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, what do you think, Kauśika, based on that would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” said the Lord, “were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, inseparable from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, having done nothing but write out and make this perfection of wisdom into a book, to take up, bear in mind, read aloud, and master it, and to respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams,  powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, they would create even more merit than that. 
 “Kauśika, let alone worship when this great billionfold world system has been filled with stūpas made of the seven precious stones, even were each single being included in the collection of beings standing in this great billionfold world system, Kauśika, to cause stūpas made of the seven precious stones to be made for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa and were to respect, revere, honor, and worship them with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, still, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, inseparable from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, who makes this perfection of wisdom into a book, takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to it, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners would, just by that, create even more merit than that.” 
 The Lord having said this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to him, “So it is, Lord, so it is. Lord, through having respected, revered, honored, and worshiped the perfection of wisdom, they have respected, revered, honored, and worshiped past, future, and present lord buddhas. 
 “Lord, were each single being of the beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east  to cause stūpas made of the seven precious stones, all of them a yojana in height, to be made for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa, and for an eon or for even more than an eon were to respect, revere, honor, and worship them with divine flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners, based on that would those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family make a lot of merit? Similarly, Lord, were each single being of the beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the ten directions to cause stūpas made of the seven precious stones, all of them a yojana in height, to be made for the worship of a tathāgata who had passed into nirvāṇa, and for an eon or for even more than an eon were to respect, revere, honor, and worship them with divine flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners, based on that would those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “Exactly so. Kauśika, exactly so. A lot, Kauśika,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord,” said Śatakratu, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who writes out and makes this perfection of wisdom into a book; takes it up, bears it in mind, reads it aloud, masters it, and properly pays attention to it; and respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners  would create even more merit than that. And why? Lord, it is because all wholesome dharmas are included in the perfection of wisdom, that is, the ten wholesome actions, the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the three gateways to liberation, the four noble truths, the six clairvoyances, the eight deliverances, and the nine serial absorptions; the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration; inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; all the meditative stabilizations, all the dhāraṇī gateways, the applications of mindfulness, the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; great love and great compassion; all-knowledge, knowledge of path aspects, and knowledge of all aspects; and all wholesome dharmas are included in the perfection of wisdom. So this, Lord, is that doctrine of the lord buddhas, having trained in which past, future, and present bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, and śrāvakas have gone forth, will go forth, and are going forth.”
This was the twenty-seventh chapter, “Reliquary,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 28: Declaration of the Good Qualities of the Thought of Awakening
Śatakratu, head of the gods, having said this, the Lord then said to him, “Exactly so. Kauśika, exactly so. Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family  who write out and make this perfection of wisdom into a book; take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, and properly pay attention to it and on top of that respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners would, based on that, make a lot of merit, an immeasurable, countless, inconceivable, infinite, incomparable amount. And why? Kauśika, it is because the knowledge of all aspects of tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas issues forth from the perfection of wisdom. Kauśika, the five perfections, all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the distinct attributes of a buddha, the five eyes, the six clairvoyances, bringing beings to maturity, and the perfect purification of a buddhafield issue forth from the perfection of wisdom. Kauśika, all-knowledge, knowledge of path aspects, and knowledge of all aspects issue forth from the perfection of wisdom. Kauśika, the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the Great Vehicle issue forth from the perfection of wisdom, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening issues forth from the perfection of wisdom too. 
 “Therefore, Kauśika, the merit created earlier would not approach the creation of merit by a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who writes out and makes this perfection of wisdom into a book; takes it up, bears it in mind, reads it aloud, masters it, and properly pays attention to it and respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners  by a hundredth part, or by a thousandth part, or by a hundred thousandth part, up to or by a one hundred million billionth part; it would not stand up to any number, or fraction, or comparison,up to or example. And why? Because, Kauśika, for as long as the perfection of wisdom remains in Jambudvīpa, the Buddha Jewel will not disappear, the Dharma Jewel and the Saṅgha Jewel will not disappear, and for that long the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, seven limbs of awakening, and path; the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; all-knowledge, knowledge of path aspects, and knowledge of all aspects; great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and great sāla tree–like business families; and Cāturmahā­rājika gods, Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin classes of gods, up to Akaniṣṭha gods will appear in the world; the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and the result of bodhisattvas will be perfectly accomplished; and there will be the unsurpassed knowledge of a buddha, the wheel of Dharma will be turned, beings will be brought to maturity, and a buddhafield will be purified.” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha gods, “Friends, you should take up, bear in mind, read aloud, and master the perfection of wisdom. Friends, you should read the perfection of wisdom aloud; you should properly pay attention to the perfection of wisdom. And why? Friends, when you have taken up, or borne in mind, or read aloud, or mastered, or properly paid attention to the perfection of wisdom, all unwholesome dharmas decrease and all wholesome dharmas increase; the classes of asuras decrease and the classes of gods increase. 
 “Friends, when you have taken up, or borne in mind, or read aloud, or mastered, or properly paid attention to the perfection of wisdom, the way of the Buddha is not brought to an end, the way of the Dharma and the way of Saṅgha are not brought to an end, and the lineage of the Three Jewels is not ended. Friends, all the perfections appear in the world; the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha appear in the world; the practice of bodhisattvas appears in the world; and stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattva great beings appear and exist in the world.”
 The Lord then said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, you should take up the perfection of wisdom. Kauśika, you should bear in mind, you should read aloud, you should master, and you should properly pay attention to the perfection of wisdom. 
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because when it occurs to the asuras  to think, as they habitually do, ‘Let us engage the Trāyastriṃśa gods in battle,’ were you to focus your thoughts on the perfection of wisdom, as you habitually do, and read it aloud, that will make the habitual thoughts of the asuras die down. They will not have thoughts again to engage in battle in the future. Or, because were you to read aloud this perfection of wisdom in the presence of those gods and goddesses when their time of death is at hand, then, even if they were to behold their birth in a terrible form of life, from hearing this perfection of wisdom the thoughts they have about a terrible form of life would die down. In future they would be born in just the abodes of gods. Kauśika, such is the force of hearing the perfection of wisdom.
 “Kauśika, because of the wholesome root planted by any son of a good family or daughter of a good family, or god or goddess, who has heard the sound of this perfection of wisdom, they all will gradually fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Kauśika, it is because those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas with their śrāvaka saṅghas who appeared in times past trained in this perfection of wisdom and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and those lord buddhas with their śrāvaka saṅghas in future times, and those buddhas who are at the present time dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in the ten directions will, having trained in this perfection of wisdom, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening too. And why? Because all buddha dharmas, all bodhisattva dharmas, all pratyekabuddha dharmas, and all śrāvaka dharmas are included in the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having said this,  Śatakratu, head of the gods, then said to him, “This, Lord—that is, the perfection of wisdom—is a great knowledge-mantra. Lord, this perfection of wisdom is an unsurpassable knowledge-mantra. Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a knowledge-mantra equal to the unequaled. And why? Because the perfection of wisdom has been set out for the elimination of all unwholesome dharmas and for the completion of all wholesome dharmas.” 
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, having said this, the Lord then said to him, “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so. This, Kauśika—that is, the perfection of wisdom—is a great knowledge-mantra. Kauśika, this perfection of wisdom is an unsurpassable knowledge-mantra. Kauśika, this perfection of wisdom is a knowledge-mantra equal to the unequaled. 
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in world systems in the ten directions have fully awakened, will fully awaken, and are fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening thanks to this very perfection of wisdom; it is because the existence of the ten wholesome actions in the world, Kauśika, and the existence in the world of the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, all the perfections, all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, the gateways to liberation, the dharma-constituent, the very limit of reality, suchness,  unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the five eyes, the six clairvoyances, the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, the bodhisattva, and the knowledge of all aspects are all thanks to this very perfection of wisdom; and it is because, Kauśika, the existence of the ten wholesome actions in the world, up to the existence of the knowledge of all aspects in the world, up to the existence of tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in the world all are thanks to the bodhisattva. 
 “To illustrate, Kauśika, just as the existence of all the constellations and stars is thanks to the disk of the moon, similarly the existence of the ten wholesome actions, wholesome practice, perfect practice, emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization gateways (the constellations), and those in training and for whom there is no more training, and śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas (the lunar mansions and stars) comes down to the bodhisattva (the disk of the moon), the existence of all-knowledge, and the existence of the Tathāgata. When lord buddhas have not fully awakened in the world, when tathāgatas do not appear, it is just the bodhisattva great beings who teach the ordinary and extraordinary Dharma to beings. 
 “And why? It is because the vehicle of the gods, the vehicle of humans, the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the Great Vehicle issue forth from the bodhisattva great beings. And it is because the skillful means with which bodhisattva great beings bring all the six perfections to completion;  meditate on all the emptinesses; cultivate the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; cause the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha to be acquired; cause the thirty-two major marks and the eighty minor signs of a great person to be acquired; cause the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels not to be directly realized; cause beings to be brought to maturity; cause a buddhafield to be purified; cause the perfect states of a bodhisattva to be appropriated; and cause the knowledge of all aspects to be acquired—it is because that skillful means issues forth from the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to the perfection of wisdom will also have these good qualities in this very life.”
 The Lord having said this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, then asked him, “Lord, what are these good qualities sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to the perfection of wisdom will also have in this very life?”
 “Kauśika,” replied the Lord, “poisoning will not cause the time of death for sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to the perfection of wisdom; their time of death will not be caused by fire, weapons, or water—their time of death will not be caused by anything at all, up to sickness, unless it is the maturation of karma.
 “Kauśika, when those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have been persecuted by a royal family have set out for the palace, those who are looking for an opportunity to hurt them will not find an opportunity even though they seek it out. And why?  Because of the splendor of just this perfection of wisdom. Kauśika, if those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family approach that palace reciting the perfection of wisdom, the princes and the important ministers will decide to welcome them, will decide to speak kind words to them, and will decide to celebrate. And why? Because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family have attended to the mind that loves all beings, and they have attended to the mind that feels compassion and joy for, and has equanimity toward, all beings.
 “Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to the perfection of wisdom will also have those good qualities in this very life. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to the perfection of wisdom will also have these good qualities in a future life as well, that is, they will never be separated from the ten wholesome actions, and they will never be separated from the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They will never be born in the hells, the animal world, or in the world of Yama. They will never have incomplete faculties, will never have missing limbs, will never be born in a family that is destitute, will never be born in a family of bamboo-flute makers, will never be born in a family defiled by crime, and will never be born in the low castes. From then on  they will constantly and always obtain a body adorned with the thirty-two major marks of a great person. In world systems where lord buddhas are standing they will miraculously take birth from a lotus and appear in the presence of those lord buddhas. Their clairvoyances will never weaken. They will attend on those lord buddhas and will pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield to listen to the Dharma when and as they want to, and when they are passing on from buddhafield to buddhafield they will bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield. 
 “Therefore, Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who want to obtain this accumulation of perfect good qualities should take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom and not become separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects. Up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they will never be without these good qualities in this life or in future lives.”
This was the twenty-eighth chapter, “Declaration of the Good Qualities of the Thought of Awakening,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 29: Different Tīrthika Religious Mendicants
Then, many different tīrthika religious mendicants intent on criticizing, a hundred of them, specifically approached the Lord to level criticism. 
 Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods, to think, “These many different tīrthika religious mendicants intent on criticizing the doctrine, a hundred of them, have specifically approached the Lord to level criticism. I will certainly recite as much of the perfection of wisdom as I have taken up in order that these different tīrthika religious mendicants will not get at all close to the Lord to hinder the teaching of the perfection of wisdom.”
Śatakratu, head of the gods, then recited as much of the perfection of wisdom as he had taken up from the Lord. Then those different tīrthika religious mendicants circumambulated the Lord from afar and, taking the road on which they had arrived, went back the way they approached. 
 Then it occurred to venerable Śāriputra  to think, “Why have those different tīrthika religious mendicants circumambulated the Lord from afar and, taking the road on which they had arrived, gone back the way they approached?”
 The Lord, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to venerable Śāriputra, then said to venerable Śāriputra, “Venerable Śāriputra, Śatakratu, head of the gods, focused his thoughts as he habitually does on this perfection of wisdom, and because of that those different tīrthika religious mendicants circumambulated me from afar and, taking the road on which they had arrived, went back the way they approached.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, I do not see any hopeful prospect in even one of those different tīrthika religious mendicants. All those different tīrthika religious mendicants decided to come, having taken offense and intent on criticizing, and I do not see anyone among the host of creatures in this world with its celestial beings, its Māras and Brahmās, and its śramaṇas and brahmins who has taken offense at or is intent on criticizing this perfection of wisdom who is capable of approaching. It is impossible.
 “And why? Śāriputra, it is because this perfection of wisdom is looked after by all the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha class of gods, the śrāvakas, those who have set out in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the bodhisattvas standing in the great billionfold world system. Why? Because they all have issued forth from this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, it is because this perfection of wisdom is looked after by all the lord buddhas together with their śrāvaka saṅghas, as well as by the pratyekabuddhas, the bodhisattva great beings, and the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction, up to in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River  in each of the ten directions. Why? Because they all have issued forth from this perfection of wisdom.”
 Then it occurred to Māra the wicked one to think, “The four retinues are seated directly in the presence of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha, and the gods living in the desire realm and the formless realm are seated directly in his presence too. It is certain that from among them he will prophesy the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of bodhisattva great beings, so I will specifically approach the Lord in order to confuse them.” 
 Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods, to think, “Hey! Māra the wicked one has magically produced this mass of four-unit forces and wants specifically to approach the Lord. Such a mass of four-unit forces that has been drawn up—this mass of four-unit forces Māra the wicked one has drawn up—is not King Bimbisāra’s. Such a mass of four-unit forces that has been drawn up is not King Prasenajit’s, is not the Śākyas’, and is not the Licchavis’. For a long time Māra the wicked one has been looking for a way and seeking for an opportunity to cause trouble for the Lord. Māra the wicked one has drawn up this mass of four-unit forces with the intention of injuring beings, so I will focus on this perfection of wisdom as I habitually do and, having recollected it, recite it.” 
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, then focused on this perfection of wisdom as he habitually does, recollected it, and recited it. And to the extent Śatakratu, head of the gods, recited the perfection of wisdom, to that extent Māra the wicked one turned back right on that same road, right through that same gate.
 Then those Cāturmahā­rājika gods and the gods from Akaniṣṭha on down in that retinue magically produced divine flowers, and while arrayed in the sky  they specifically tossed them down on and strewed them over the Lord and made this statement: “For as long as this perfection of wisdom remains among the humans of Jambudvīpa, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha will not disappear, the good Dharma will last for a long time, and the Saṅgha will appear in the world. Similarly, the superiority of the practice of the bodhisattva great beings will be famous in all the buddhafields in the great billionfold world system, and similarly in those in the ten directions, and in whichever region a son of a good family or daughter of a good family has written out and made this perfection of wisdom into a book and borne it in mind, that region will become an awakened place, and the ground where this perfection of wisdom is practiced will have a protector and will be free from gloom. So, let the humans of Jambudvīpa practice this perfection of wisdom for a long time!” 
 The gods having said this, the Lord then said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Exactly so, Kauśika. Kauśika, whichever region, anywhere in this vast world system, where the perfection of wisdom is practiced and where it exists written out in book form is a place that has become awakened, a place with a protector, that will be free from gloom and darkness.”
 Then those gods magically produced divine flowers, specifically strewed them over the Lord, and made this statement: “Lord, Māra or the gods of the Māra class cannot find a way to cause trouble to any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom. We too, Lord, will constantly and always guard, protect, and keep safe that son of a good family or daughter of a good family. We will also treat as the Teacher that son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters,  and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to the Lord, “Lord, when sons of a good family or daughters of a good family take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom, they will not become endowed with a paltry wholesome root. Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will have served all the former victors well. Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, up to properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom will have attended on many buddhas and will have been looked after by spiritual friends. And why? Because the knowledge of all aspects issues forth from this—that is, the perfection of wisdom—and the perfection of wisdom issues forth from this, that is, the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because the knowledge of all aspects is not one thing and the perfection of wisdom another. Therefore, the knowledge of all aspects and the perfection of wisdom are not two and cannot be divided into two; they have not been broken apart and have not been cut apart.”
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, having spoken thus, the Lord then said to him, “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so. It is just as you say. The knowledge of all aspects and the perfection of wisdom are not two and cannot be divided into two; they have not been broken apart and have not been cut apart.”
This was the twenty-ninth chapter, “Different Tīrthika Religious Mendicants,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 30: The Benefits of Taking Up and Adoration
Then venerable Ānanda said to the Lord, “Lord, you do not praise the perfection of giving, and you do not praise the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, or perfection of concentration. Similarly, up to you do not proclaim the names of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha as you proclaim the name of the perfection of wisdom.”
 Venerable Ānanda having said this, the Lord then said to him, “Ānanda, these—that is, the  five perfections, connect this in the same way with each, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—are preceded by the perfection of wisdom.
 “What do you think, Ānanda, does giving that has not been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects get the name ‘perfection’? What do you think, Ānanda, do morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom that have not been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects get the name ‘perfection’?” 
 “No, Lord,” answered Ānanda. “Lord, why does giving that has been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects, and morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom that have been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects, get the name ‘perfection’?” 
 “Ānanda,” replied the Lord, “when giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom have been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects in a nondual way, they get the name ‘perfection.’ When they have been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects in a nonappropriating way, in a nonapprehending way, they get the name ‘perfection.’ ”
 Ānanda then asked, “Lord, why does giving that has been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects  in a nondual way get the name ‘perfection’? Lord, why do morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom that have been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects in a nondual way get the name ‘perfection’?” 
 “Ānanda,” replied the Lord, “it is because it has been dedicated by way of the nonduality of form, and it has been dedicated by way of the nonduality of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, up to awakening.”
 Ānanda then asked, “Lord, why is it by way of the nonduality of form? Why is it by way of the nonduality of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness? Up to why is it by way of the nonduality of awakening?”
 “Ānanda,” replied the Lord, “it is because form is empty of form. Feeling is empty of feeling. Perception is empty of perception. Volitional factors are empty of volitional factors, and consciousness is empty of consciousness. And why? Because form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness and that perfection are not two and cannot be divided into two. Perfection and awakening are not two and cannot be divided into two. Therefore, Ānanda, here the five perfections, up to awakening and the knowledge of all aspects are preceded by just this perfection of wisdom. 
 “To illustrate, Ānanda, through the power of a collection, seeds grow when planted on this great earth. Similarly, Ānanda, all the perfections,  the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to the knowledge of all aspects grow when planted on the perfection of wisdom. And, planted on the knowledge of all aspects, all the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha grow. Therefore, Ānanda, just this perfection of wisdom is the leader of these perfections, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha and the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Śatakratu then said, “Lord, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha has not proclaimed all the good qualities of the perfection of wisdom, the good qualities that have been appropriated by a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom. It is because that son or daughter takes up and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom that the ten wholesome actions appear in the world; that the four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions appear in the world; up to that the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha appear in the world. Lord, it is because they have taken up, up to have properly paid attention to the perfection of wisdom that there are great sāla tree–like royal families in the world, there are great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and there are great sāla tree–like business families in the world; that there are the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to and that there are Akaniṣṭha gods in the world.  Lord, it is because they have taken up, up to have properly paid attention to the perfection of wisdom that there are stream enterers in the world; that there are once-returners, non-returners, and worthy ones in the world; that there are pratyekabuddhas in the world; and that there are bodhisattvas in the world. Lord, it is because they have taken up, up to have properly paid attention to the perfection of wisdom that there are tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in the world.” 
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, having said this, the Lord then said to him, “Kauśika, I am not saying a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has taken up, up to has properly paid attention to the perfection of wisdom has merely that many good qualities. And why? Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom are endowed with an immeasurable aggregate of morality and will not become separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects. Those who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom are endowed with an immeasurable aggregate of meditative stabilization, aggregate of wisdom, aggregate of liberation, and aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation, and they will not become separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects. Kauśika, you should know that those who . . . up to properly pay attention  are like tathāgatas. They will not become separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Kauśika, the aggregate of morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation in the aggregate of morality, aggregate of meditative stabilization, aggregate of wisdom, aggregate of liberation, and aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas does not, Kauśika, approach the aggregate of morality, up to aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation in the aggregate of morality, up to aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation of a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who stands in the perfection of wisdom even by a hundredth part, or by a thousandth part, or by a hundred thousandth part; neither does it stand up to any number, or fraction, or counting, or example, or comparison. 
 “And why? Because, Kauśika, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family are freed from the thought of the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels without being separated from any dharma and without it having been produced at all. 
 “Kauśika, it is to be expected that a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom and keeps it in mind, who respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, will obtain these good qualities in this life and in future lives.”
 The Lord having said this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, then said to him, “I too will constantly and always guard, protect, and keep safe  a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up this perfection of wisdom, keeps this perfection of wisdom in mind, and respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. They will never be separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, having said this, the Lord then said to hm, “Kauśika, in order to listen to the Dharma, many hundreds of thousands of gods will come near to a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who is reciting the perfection of wisdom. Those gods will want to connect those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family with the confidence giving a readiness to speak about the perfection of wisdom. When those Dharma preachers do not wish to teach, those very gods will also, because of their respect for the Dharma, want to connect them with the confidence giving a readiness to speak.
 “Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom and, having written it out in book form, respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners gets these good qualities too in this life.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who are explaining this perfection of wisdom in front of the four retinues are not cowed when somebody argues and finds fault with them. And why?  Because this perfection of wisdom guards, protects, and keeps safe those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family. It is also because in the perfection of wisdom ordinary and extraordinary dharmas, those with outflows and without outflows, those shared in common and not shared in common, those that are wholesome and unwholesome, those that are compounded and uncompounded, the dharmas of śrāvakas, the dharmas of pratyekabuddhas, the dharmas of bodhisattvas, the dharmas of buddhas, and all dharmas are not different. 
 “And why? Because that son of a good family or daughter of a good family standing in inner emptiness, up to standing in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not see fault finding and does not see a fault finder either. Thus no fault will be found in that son of a good family or daughter of a good family mentored by the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, up to properly pays attention to the perfection of wisdom does not feel cowed, tense up, tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified. And why? Because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family do not see a real basis that could feel cowed, could tense up, could tremble, could feel frightened, or could become terrified. 
 “Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom, and respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers,  perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners appropriates these good qualities too in this life.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, fathers, mothers, friends, retainers, kinsmen, blood relatives, those following a secluded religious life, and brahmins come to feel great affection for any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom and, having written it out in book form, respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. Those bodhisattvas become loved by the lord buddhas standing in all the world systems in the ten directions and by bodhisattvas, śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, worthy ones, all those in training, and all those for whom there is no more training; they become dear to the world with its celestial beings, with its Māras, and with its Brahmās, and to the whole populace with those following a secluded religious life and the brahmins, with its gods, humans, and asuras. They become endowed with a seamless confident readiness; endowed with a seamless perfection of giving; endowed with a seamless perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom; endowed with seamless inner emptiness, up to emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; endowed with seamless applications of mindfulness, right efforts,  legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, paths, ten tathāgata powers, and four fearlessnesses; and endowed with four seamless detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen seamless distinct attributes of a buddha, seamless dhāraṇī gateways and meditative stabilization gateways, seamless clairvoyances, bringing beings to maturity, and purification of a buddhafield; and endowed with a seamless knowledge of all aspects. They become able, because they are endowed with the Dharma, to curb all the disputes with tīrthikas that ever come up. 
 “Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom and, having written it out, respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners also appropriates these good qualities in this life and future lives, and they will not become separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, the Cāturmahā­rājika gods that are in the great billionfold world system who have set out for unsurpassed awakening come to where a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, having written out this perfection of wisdom in book form, bears it in mind. They take up this perfection of wisdom, Kauśika, bear it in mind, read it aloud, and master it, and, having venerated and bowed to it, they go back. Similarly,  the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapurohita, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, and Brahmā gods who have made a prayer for unsurpassed awakening come to where a son of a good family or daughter of a good family writes out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bears it in mind. They take up this perfection of wisdom, Kauśika, bear it in mind, read it aloud, and master it, and, having venerated and bowed down to it, they go back. Kauśika, also the Śuddhāvāsa gods—the Avṛha, Sudarśana, Sudṛśa, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha gods—think to come there, take up this perfection of wisdom, Kauśika, bear it in mind, read it aloud, and master it, and, having venerated it, they go back. 
 “Kauśika, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family should have the following thought. They should think, ‘May the gods included in the Cāturmahā­rājika and the Bṛhatphala class of gods on down, the Śuddhāvāsa class of gods, and the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas that are in world systems in the ten directions who have set out for unsurpassed awakening come here, and may they take up this perfection of wisdom, bear it in mind, read it aloud, and master it, and, having venerated and bowed to it, go back. May I make this offering  of a gift of Dharma to them.’
 “Those Cāturmahā­rājika gods and Bṛhatphala gods on down and the Śuddhāvāsa class of gods that are in world systems in the ten directions who have set out for unsurpassed awakening do think to come there. They take up this perfection of wisdom, bear it in mind, read it aloud, and master it, and, having venerated it, they go back. 
 “The Cāturmahā­rājika gods and the Akaniṣṭha gods on down that are in this great billionfold world system and the Cāturmahā­rājika gods and the Akaniṣṭha gods on down that are in world systems in the ten directions will guard, protect, and keep safe that son of a good family or daughter of a good family so that those seeking an opportunity to hurt will not get an opportunity unless it is the maturation of karma. 
 “Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will appropriate these good qualities too in this life. And why? Because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; they have set out to be a refuge for all beings, not to reject all beings—to be of benefit and bring happiness to all beings.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked the Lord, “Lord, how will those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family know the Cāturmahā­rājika gods have come there from all around and that the Akaniṣṭha gods on down have come there  to take up this perfection of wisdom, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, respect, revere, honor, worship, venerate, and bow down to it?”
 “Kauśika,” answered the Lord, “when those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family smell a celestial divine fragrance they have never smelled before they will know ‘extremely powerful gods have come here to hear, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, respect, revere, honor, worship, venerate, and bow down to this perfection of wisdom.’
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, when those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family are habitually clean, because of their habitual cleanliness the gods will come there to hear, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, respect, revere, honor, worship, venerate, and bow down to this perfection of wisdom, and they will become enraptured. 
 “In that place the gods that are only slightly powerful are unable to bear the splendor of the extremely powerful ones and feel they have to withdraw from there. 
 “The belief of those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family becomes stronger and stronger in line with the arrival there of those extremely powerful gods. 
 “On that place on the earth one should not behave like those who are not habitually clean. That place should be adorned with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. That place should be adorned in many ways; it should be daubed with fragrant substances and strewn with loose flowers, and a cloth canopy with tassels hanging down should be stretched out over it. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will not feel  physical weariness but will feel a sense of physical pleasure, a sense of physical lightness; they will do what they do physically with a sense of ease. They will also feel a sense of mental lightness, will do what they do mentally with a sense of ease, and will experience mental pleasure. 
 “From then on, they will conceive of everything in terms of the perfection of wisdom from the bottom of their hearts and will not have bad dreams. In their dreams they will see a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha adorned with the thirty-two major marks of a great person and with a body golden in color, seated and teaching the Dharma at the head of the śrāvaka saṅgha and at the head of the bodhisattva community. From those tathāgatas they hear just discourse connected with the six perfections; they hear just discourse connected with the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and they hear just the meaning of those perfections, up to the meaning of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They will see the Bodhi tree, they will see the bodhisattva great being approaching the site of awakening, and they will see the full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They will see many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion bodhisattvas chanting the buddha’s words in the assembly, saying, ‘Get the knowledge of all aspects, bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield.’ They will hear the sound of one hundred million billion buddhas from the eastern direction. Similarly, they will hear the sound of many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion  buddhas from the south, west, and north, below and above, and intermediate directions. They will hear in such and such a world system such and such a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha visibly surrounded by his many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion bodhisattvas, and by many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion śrāvakas, seated teaching the Dharma. They will see many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion buddhas in the eastern direction entering into complete nirvāṇa, and they will also see many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion buddhas entering into complete nirvāṇa in . . . up to the ten directions. They will also see hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion reliquaries, receptacles for the remaining physical constituents of those tathāgatas, made of various precious things. They will see the respecting, revering, honoring, and worshiping of them with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will have such good dreams as those. 
 “They will fall asleep happy and wake up happy, they will have the experience of their bodies being infused with energy, and they will have the experience of their bodies not being heavy but light. They will not have a powerful greediness for food, and they will not be greedy for requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses. Kauśika, this is like a monk practitioner of yoga who has arisen from meditative stabilization with a mind satisfied by mental work. They do not have a powerful greediness for food. They have less.  Similarly, Kauśika, the nonhumans supply a son of a good family or daughter of a good family with energy. Those lord buddhas, and also the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas that are in the ten directions, infuse their body with energy.
 “Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family with the thought of the knowledge of all aspects who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom appropriate these good qualities too in this life.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, even if sons of a good family or daughters of a good family do not take up, do not bear in mind, do not read aloud, do not master, and do not properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom, still, if, having written it out in book form, they bear it in mind and respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, based on that, Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family create a lot of merit. To respect, revere, honor, and worship tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas and their śrāvaka saṅghas that are in world systems all around in the ten directions with requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—and to respect, revere, honor, and worship the reliquaries of those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas when they have passed into complete nirvāṇa  along with their śrāvaka saṅghas with requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—is not like that.” 
This was the thirtieth chapter, “The Benefits of Taking Up and Adoration,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 31: Physical Remains
Then the Lord asked Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, which of these two options would you choose: to have this Jambudvīpa filled right to the top with the physical remains of tathāgatas and to respect, revere, honor, and worship them with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, or to be given this perfection of wisdom?” 
 “Lord,” replied Śatakratu, “were I to be offered this Jambudvīpa filled right to the top with the physical remains of the tathāgatas and to be offered this perfection of wisdom written out in book form—were I to be presented with these two options—I would want the perfection of wisdom. And why? Lord, it is not that I do not venerate those physical remains of the tathāgatas. Lord, I do indeed venerate them. It is not that I do not respect those physical remains of the tathāgatas, or do not revere, do not honor, and do not worship them. But I respect, revere, honor, and worship those physical remains of the tathāgatas because they come about from the perfection of wisdom. The physical remains of the tathāgatas  are suffused by the perfection of wisdom. That is why the physical remains of the tathāgatas get to be worshiped.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended, cannot be pointed out, does not obstruct, and has only one mark—that is, no mark—so how could you think to take it up? Why can it not be taken up? It is because this perfection of wisdom is not a place to be seized or not seized, to be increased or reduced, to be taken away from or added to, for defilement or purification. It does not bestow the buddha dharmas; it does not remove the dharmas of ordinary persons. It does not bestow the dharmas of bodhisattvas, the dharmas of pratyekabuddhas, the dharmas of śrāvakas, the dharmas of those in training, or the dharmas of those for whom there is no more training. It does not remove the dharmas of ordinary persons. It does not bestow the uncompounded element, and it does not remove the compounded element. It does not bestow inner emptiness, up to or the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; it does not bestow the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, the legs of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the limbs of awakening, the path, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. It does not bestow the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Venerable monk Śāriputra, exactly!” said Śatakratu. “I too understand that the perfection of wisdom does not bestow the buddha dharmas, up to the knowledge of all aspects. Why? Because the perfection of wisdom is not two, because a dual perfection of wisdom is not available. Similarly, a dual perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving is not available, because it is not two.”
 Then the Lord complimented Śatakratu, head of the gods. “Kauśika, exactly so! Excellent, excellent, Kauśika, it is exactly as you say! A dual perfection of wisdom is not available because the perfection of wisdom is not two. Similarly, a dual perfection of concentration . . . , perfection of perseverance . . . , perfection of patience . . . , perfection of morality . . . , and perfection of giving is not available, because it is not two. Kauśika, to accept the perfection of wisdom as two is simply to accept the dharma-constituent as two. And why? Kauśika, the perfection of wisdom and the dharma-constituent are not two, nor are they divided. Similarly, the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving and the dharma-constituent are not two, nor are they divided. Connect this in the same way with each, up to to accept the perfection of wisdom as two is simply to accept suchness as two, up to . . . is simply to accept the very limit of reality and the inconceivable element as two.” 
 Śatakratu then said, “Lord,  this perfection of wisdom in which bodhisattva great beings train to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is the place to which the world with its gods, humans, and asuras rightly bows down. 
 “Lord, at the times when I am present on the throne of the head of the gods in the Sudharmā assembly of gods, the gods come to attend on me there in my place. When I am not present on my lion throne they think, ‘Seated on this Dharma throne, Śatakratu, head of the gods, teaches Dharma to the Trāyastriṃśa gods,’ and they bow down to that throne of mine and go back. Similarly, Lord, the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas come from the ten directions with the thought to go and bow down to where this perfection of wisdom is kept written out, or is read aloud, or is perfectly revealed to others and, having bowed down to this perfection of wisdom, to go back. And why? It is because the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have come about from this perfection of wisdom, all the requirements for the happiness of all beings have arisen from it, and because whatever physical remains of the tathāgatas there are, they too have come about from this perfection of wisdom. Even when a tathāgata is pursuing the practice of awakening, this perfection of wisdom serves as the foundation, serves as the condition, serves as the cause, and serves as the force for the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Lord, because that is the case, of those two options I would want just the perfection of wisdom.  Having taken the perfection of wisdom, I would recite it with a mind that longs for the good Dharma. 
 “Lord, when I pay attention to the perfection of wisdom, I see no reason to fear or be petrified. And why? Lord, it is because the perfection of wisdom has no causal sign; the perfection of wisdom, Lord, has no token, is inexpressible, and cannot be given voice to. 
 “Similarly, Lord, the perfection of concentration, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of patience, the perfection of morality, and the perfection of giving, up to the knowledge of all aspects cannot be given voice to. 
 “Lord, were the perfection of wisdom to have a causal sign, were it not to have no causal sign, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha, having understood that all dharmas have no causal sign, have no token, are inexpressible, and cannot be talked about, would not have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and taught beings that dharmas have no causal sign, have no token, are inexpressible, and cannot be talked about. Lord, it is because the perfection of wisdom has no causal sign, has no token, is inexpressible, and cannot be talked about that the tathāgata, having understood that all dharmas have no causal sign, have no token, are inexpressible, cannot be talked about, and are inconceivable, did fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and does teach beings  that dharmas have no causal sign, have no token, are inexpressible, cannot be given voice to, are inconceivable, and are not amenable to language.
 “Therefore, Lord, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras should respect, should revere, should honor, and should worship this perfection of wisdom with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners; they should take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, and master it. It is correct that life in the hells, the animal world, and the world of Yama will then be no more, and they will not descend to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. It is correct that up until fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they will see the tathāgata, bring beings to maturity, and, passing on from buddhafield to buddhafield, respect, revere, honor, and worship this perfection of wisdom with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, were I to be offered this great billionfold world system filled right to the top with the physical remains of tathāgatas, and were I to be offered this perfection of wisdom written out in book form, presented with these two options I would want just this perfection of wisdom.  And why? Those physical remains of the tathāgatas come about from the perfection of wisdom; that is why they are respected, revered, honored, and worshiped, and that is why those sons of a good family who have respected, revered, honored, and worshiped them are not born in terrible forms of life, experience everything perfect of the gods and humans, and in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, or the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, or the Great Vehicle enter complete nirvāṇa in accordance with earlier prayers they have made. 
 “To see the Tathāgata and to see the perfection of wisdom is equivalent, because, Lord, the Tathāgata and the perfection of wisdom are not two and cannot be divided into two.
 “Furthermore, Lord, for a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha to teach the discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, up to and expositions with the three sorts of miracles, and for a son of a good family or a daughter of a good family to take up this perfection of wisdom and, having mastered it, teach it to others is equivalent. And why? Lord, it is because a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’s teaching of the discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, up to and expositions with the three sorts of miracles comes about from it. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, for as many tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the east to teach the discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, up to and expositions with the three sorts of miracles, and similarly, for the lord buddhas in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the south, west, and north, below and above, and the intermediate directions to teach the discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, up to and expositions with the three sorts of miracles, and for a son of a good family or a daughter of a good family to take up this perfection of wisdom, up to master it, and teach it to others is equivalent. And why? Because tathāgatas come about from it, and because discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, up to and expositions with the three sorts of miracles come about from it too.
 “Furthermore, Lord, to respect, revere, honor, and worship as many tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the ten directions with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, and to respect, revere, honor, and worship this perfection of wisdom written out in book form with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners is equivalent. And why? Because the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas come about from it. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, for the son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has taken up this perfection of wisdom,  borne it in mind, read it aloud, mastered it, properly paid attention to it, and illuminated it for others, it is correct that life in the hells, the animal world, and the world of Yama will be no more, and it is correct that descent to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level will not happen and that they will stand on the irreversible bodhisattva level. And why? Because for the son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom and takes it up, bears it in mind, reads it aloud, masters it, and properly pays attention to it, as well as respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, it is right that there are no hazards anywhere. 
 “To illustrate, Lord, a person fearful of rich creditors seeks safety with the ruler, and in the retinue of the ruler is actually lobbied by those he fears. They do not scare him again. And why? Lord, having sought safety in the powerful, that happens. That is why, having sought safety in the ruler, he is not scared. Similarly, Lord, the physical remains of the tathāgatas get to be worshiped because they are suffused with the perfection of wisdom. Lord, there the perfection of wisdom should be viewed as being like a ruler; the physical relics of the tathāgatas that get to be worshiped because they are suffused by the perfection of wisdom should be viewed as being like the person who has sought safety with the ruler and gets to be feted.  You should know that even the knowledge of all aspects is suffused by the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Because that is the case, of those two options I would want just the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because the physical remains of the tathāgatas come about from it, the thirty-two major marks of a great person come about from it, the ten tathāgata powers come about from it, the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha come about from it, and great love and great compassion come about from it. Lord, all five perfections get the name perfection because they come about from it. The knowledge of all aspects of the tathāgatas comes about from it. 
 “Lord, a human or nonhuman looking for a way to cause trouble to beings in a great billionfold world system does not find a way to cause trouble to those beings who take up this perfection of wisdom, bear it in mind, read it aloud, and master it, so those beings gradually enter into complete nirvāṇa. 
 “Thus, Lord, this perfection of wisdom, like a jewel, serves a great purpose. The perfection of wisdom is made available for doing the work a buddha has to do for those beings standing in the great billionfold world system. It is right, Lord, that a buddha comes into being in a world system where the perfection is being practiced. 
 “To give an illustration, Lord, there is a large, priceless jewel. That precious jewel is endowed with good qualities such as the following: Nonhumans do not find an opportunity to cause trouble to any place the large precious jewel is placed, and if, when a man or woman is possessed by a nonhuman, the precious jewel is brought out, the moment the precious jewel is brought out the nonhuman is unable to bear the splendor of that large precious jewel and flees. If the precious jewel is attached to a body feverish with jaundice it clears up the bile disorder, the sickness does not increase, and it is cured; if the precious jewel is attached to a body wracked by chills and the flu it clears up the wind disorder; and if the precious jewel is attached to a body sick with a phlegm disorder, all the phlegm disorders are cured as well. When a son of a good family or daughter of a good family is wracked by a disorder of the three humors in combination, if the precious jewel is attached to the body, that is cured as well. That precious jewel also illuminates the night. During the advent of the hot season, wherever the precious jewel is put it cools that place down; during the advent of the cold season, wherever the precious jewel is put it warms that place up; and wherever the precious jewel is put that place is cool but not cold, warm but not hot, and seasonably pleasant. In whatever place the precious jewel is kept no poisonous snakes and scorpions or other poisonous crawling creatures remain in that place. When the precious jewel is shown to a son of a good family or daughter of a good family bitten by a poisonous snake, the moment it is shown to them  the poison totally disappears. That precious jewel is endowed with good qualities such as those and so on.
 “Lord, if the precious jewel is attached to the bodies of those men or women who are wracked by various sicknesses, all their sicknesses are cured. Lord, all water into which the precious jewel is introduced takes on its natural color and becomes endowed with the eight good qualities. Lord, if the precious jewel is wrapped in a blue cloth and introduced into water it turns the water blue. If the precious jewel, in other instances, is wrapped in a yellow, or red, or reddish brown, or crystal-colored cloth and introduced into water it turns the water those colors. If the precious jewel is wrapped in a cloth of a mixture of colors and introduced into water, it turns the water that mixture of colors. Lord, if the precious jewel is introduced into dirty water it makes it clean. That precious jewel is endowed with good qualities such as those, and so on.”
 Then venerable Ānanda asked Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, what do you think? Is this a precious jewel of the gods, or do the humans of Jambudvīpa have something so precious as this as well?” 
 “Elder Ānanda,” replied Śatakratu, “this is a precious jewel of the gods. The precious jewels of the humans of Jambudvīpa are stunted and heavy; the precious jewels of the gods are big and light. Unlike the precious jewels of the gods, the precious jewels of the humans of Jambudvīpa are not replete with good qualities, so  those precious jewels of the humans of Jambudvīpa do not compare with a millionth part of a jewel of the gods; they do not stand up to any fraction, or counting, or example.” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to the Lord, “Lord, if you introduce this precious jewel into a basket, even when you have taken this precious jewel out of the basket, the basket still retains an attraction because of thinking ‘it was there, in there.’ Similarly, Lord, the physical and mental suffering and harm perpetrated by humans or nonhumans on sons of a good family or daughters of a good family do not occur in any place where this perfection of wisdom is practiced.
 “There precious jewel is an expression for the perfection of wisdom and knowledge of all aspects. The good qualities of the perfection of wisdom are infinite, so is it possible to proclaim as many good qualities of the perfection of wisdom as there are? 
 “Similarly, these good qualities of the knowledge of all aspects—the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving; inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path; up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, the knowledge of a knower of all, the dharma-constituent, the certification of dharmas, suchness, the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element—are the good qualities on account of which  the physical remains of a tathāgata who has entered complete nirvāṇa get to be worshiped. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, those physical remains were the receptacle of the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, the elimination of all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions, a constant staying in a state of equanimity, and the natural state not robbed of mindfulness. That is why they get to be worshiped. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, those physical remains were the receptacle of the jewel-like perfections. Those physical remains of a tathāgata were the receptacle of perfections that are not defiled and are not purified, perfections that are not produced and do not stop, perfections that are not appropriated and are not forsaken, and perfections that do not come and do not go. Those physical remains of a tathāgata were the receptacle of perfections that are the true nature of dharmas. Those physical remains of the Tathāgata are suffused with the true nature of dharmas. That is why those physical remains of a tathāgata get to be worshiped. 
 “Furthermore, Lord, let alone this great billionfold world system filled right to the top with the physical remains of tathāgatas, Lord, even were I to be offered as many great billionfold world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River filled right to the top with the physical remains of tathāgatas, and this perfection of wisdom written out in book form—Lord, presented with these two options I would want just this perfection of wisdom. And why? The physical remains of the tathāgatas are suffused by the perfection of wisdom.  It is because they come about from it that they get to be worshiped.
 “Lord, when the wholesome roots of a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has respected, revered, honored, and worshiped the physical remains of the tathāgatas have grown to their limit, they experience the happinesses of gods and humans, they experience the happinesses of great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and great sāla tree–like business families, and of the Cāturmahā­rājika gods and the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods. The wholesome roots bring the suffering of just those to an end. A son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has respected, revered, honored, and worshiped the perfection of wisdom, on the other hand, completes the perfection of concentration and thereby completes the perfection of perseverance; completes the perfection of perseverance and thereby completes the perfection of patience; completes the perfection of patience and thereby completes the perfection of morality; and completes the perfection of morality and thereby completes the perfection of giving. Similarly, they complete the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to practicing the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and they pass beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha level and enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva. Having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva  they gain the clairvoyances of a bodhisattva, pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield, assuming bodies at will, whatever bodies will bring beings to maturity. Alternatively, they assume the body of a wheel-turning emperor, or of those in great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and great sāla tree–like business families, and bring beings to maturity.
 “Lord, because that is the case, it is not that I do not respect the physical remains of the tathāgatas, and it is not that I do not seek to obtain them. But still, it is on account of revering the perfection of wisdom that I revere, that I respect, that I honor, and that I worship the physical remains of the tathāgatas.
 “Furthermore, Lord, those who want to see tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas standing in infinite countless world systems in the ten directions as the dharma body and as the form body should take up this perfection of wisdom, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, illuminate it in detail for others, and properly pay attention to it. 
 “A son of a good family or daughter of a good family who wants to see the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas of the ten directions, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family, practicing the perfection of wisdom, should cultivate mindfulness of the buddhas in accordance with what the dharmas actually are. As for what the dharmas actually are,  Lord, they are two. What are the two? What the dharmas actually are when the dharmas are compounded and what the dharmas actually are when the dharmas are uncompounded. 
 “Lord, what are the actual dharmas when the dharmas are compounded? They are the knowledge of inner emptiness, up to the knowledge of emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, knowledge of the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, knowledge of the ten tathāgata powers, knowledge of the four fearlessnesses, knowledge of the four detailed and thorough knowledges, knowledge of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, knowledge of wholesome and unwholesome dharmas, knowledge of dharmas with outflows and without outflows, knowledge of basic immorality and what is not basic immorality, knowledge of the ordinary and extraordinary, and knowledge of defilement and purification dharmas. These are said to be what the dharmas actually are when the dharmas are compounded.
 “What are the actual dharmas when the dharmas are uncompounded? They are the nonexistence of production, the nonexistence of stopping, the nonexistence of lasting, the nonexistence of lasting and changing into something else, the nonexistence of defilement, the nonexistence of purification, the nonexistence of decrease, and the nonexistence of increase in any dharma, up to the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature of all dharmas. And what is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature of all dharmas? All dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, so this is said to be what the dharmas actually are when the dharmas are uncompounded.”
 Then the Lord said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so! The tathāgatas,  worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas who appeared in times past fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening thanks to just this perfection of wisdom; the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas who will appear in future times will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening thanks to just this perfection of wisdom; and the present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas presently dwelling and maintaining themselves in infinite, countless world systems in the ten directions fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening thanks to just this perfection of wisdom.
 “Those who were the śrāvakas of past tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, those who will be the śrāvakas of future tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, and those who are standing at the present time as the śrāvakas of present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas reached, will reach, and are reaching the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the result of worthy one thanks to just this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Those who were pratyekabuddhas in times past, those who will be pratyekabuddhas in future times, and those presently dwelling and maintaining themselves in infinite, countless world systems in the ten directions reached,  will reach, and are reaching their own awakening thanks to just this perfection of wisdom. 
 “And why? It is because this perfection of wisdom gives detailed instruction for the three vehicles and instruction by way of no causal sign, by way of no production, by way of no stopping, by way of no defilement, by way of no purification, by way of no enactment, by way of no appropriating, by way of no forsaking, by way of not taking anything away, by way of not adding anything, by way of no grasping, and by way of no rejecting. 
 “Furthermore, it does it as ordinary convention, not ultimately. And why? Because the perfection of wisdom is not perfect and not imperfect. It is not over there or over here, nor has it stayed up or sunk down, nor is it the same or sometimes different, with a causal sign or without a causal sign, ordinary or extraordinary, compounded or uncompounded, wholesome or unwholesome, or past, future, or present. 
 “Kauśika, the perfection of wisdom does not bestow any dharma. It does not bestow pratyekabuddha dharmas, worthy one dharmas, or the dharmas of ordinary persons.”
 “Lord,” replied Śatakratu, “this—that is, the perfection of wisdom—is a great perfection. Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are aware of the thought activities of all beings, but they do not apprehend a being, up to they do not apprehend one who knows and one who sees. They also do not apprehend form, and they do not apprehend feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; they do not apprehend the eyes, they do not apprehend a form, they do not apprehend eye consciousness, they do not apprehend eye contact, and they do not apprehend any pleasurable, or suffering, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling that arises from the condition of contact with the eyes. Similarly, they do not apprehend the ears . . . the nose . . . the tongue . . . the body . . . or the thinking mind, they do not apprehend thinking-mind consciousness, they do not apprehend thinking-mind contact, and they do not apprehend any pleasurable feeling or suffering feeling, or neither pleasurable nor suffering feeling that arises from the condition of contact with the thinking mind. They do not apprehend the applications of mindfulness; they do not apprehend the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path; and they do not apprehend the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They do not apprehend bodhi, buddha, or buddhadharmas. 
 “And why? Because the perfection of wisdom is not made available in a way that anything can be apprehended. And why? Because what apprehends and what is apprehended have no intrinsic nature.”
 “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so!” said the Lord. “Kauśika, given that bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom by way of not apprehending anything do not apprehend even awakening, what need is there to mention that they do not apprehend a bodhisattva,  and they do not apprehend the dharmas of bodhisattvas.”
 Śatakratu then asked, “Lord, why is it that bodhisattva great beings practice only the perfection of wisdom and do not practice the other perfections?”
 “Kauśika,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattvas do not practice only the perfection of wisdom; they practice all the perfections, and practice, moreover, by way of not apprehending anything. They do not apprehend a gift, do not apprehend a giver, and do not apprehend a recipient; they do not apprehend morality, do not apprehend being moral, and do not apprehend immorality; they do not apprehend patience, do not apprehend an object of patience, and do not apprehend having patience; they do not apprehend perseverance, do not apprehend something that has to be done, and do not apprehend body and mind; they do not apprehend thought, do not apprehend meditative stabilization, and do not apprehend absorption; and they do not apprehend wisdom, do not apprehend an object of wisdom, and do not apprehend being wise. 
 “Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings giving gifts are led by the perfection of wisdom by way of not apprehending all dharmas. The protection of morality, cultivation of patience, exertion at perseverance, and absorption in concentration are preceded by the perfection of wisdom. The investigation of the dharmas of bodhisattvas is preceded by the perfection of wisdom. Connect this in the same way with the investigation of the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields is preceded by the perfection of wisdom by way of not apprehending all dharmas. Connect this with the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening by way of not apprehending all dharmas. Connect this with the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha by way of not apprehending all dharmas. Connect this with the rest, up to the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending all dharmas. 
 “Kauśika, the trees in Jambudvīpa have different leaves and bear different fruit, but when it comes to the shadows of those trees, as many as there are, apart from again and again counting it a ‘shadow,’ there is no distinction or differentiation. Similarly, Kauśika, there is no distinction or differentiation among the five perfections informed by the perfection of wisdom and dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending anything.”
 Śatakratu then said, “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is endowed with great compassion; this perfection of wisdom brings all good qualities to completion, is endowed with infinite good qualities, is endowed with boundless good qualities, and is endowed with unlimited good qualities. 
 “Lord, if a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom and bears it in mind and respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners properly pays attention to it as it has been expounded, and if a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom bestows it on others, which of the two creates more merit?”
 The Lord replied, “So, Kauśika, here I will pose a counterquestion right to you. You should answer  to the extent you can. Who do you think, Kauśika, creates more merit—a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who respects, reveres, honors, and worships the physical remains of the Tathāgata with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners, or another son of a good family or daughter of a good family who shares them and bestows just a sesame seed measure of the physical remains of the Tathāgata on others, so that a son of a good family or daughter of a good family then respects, reveres, honors, and worships those physical remains of the Tathāgata just a sesame seed in size with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners?”
 “The way I understand the meaning of what you, Lord, have said,” answered Śatakratu, “is that the son of a good family or daughter of a good family who bestows them on others creates even more merit than those who just personally respect, revere, honor, and worship the physical remains of the Tathāgata with flowers and so on. The Tathāgata, seeing the force of that reality, feeling great compassion for those who, among the mass of beings, can be trained by the physical remains of a tathāgata, becomes absorbed in vajra-like meditative equipoise, shatters the vajra-like body, and imbues the physical remains of the Tathāgata with a special power. Lord, the end of the wholesome root planted by those who worship even just a sesame seed measure of the physical remains of the Tathāgata when the Tathāgata has passed into complete nirvāṇa cannot be known until they all have passed into complete nirvāṇa.” 
 “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so!” said the Lord. “A son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom and bestowed it on others creates even more merit than that son of a good family or daughter of a good family who respects, reveres, honors, and worships it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who goes to others and explicates, teaches, explains, gives a commentary on, and makes clear this perfection of wisdom creates even more merit than that earlier one—so they are rightfully the teacher or the learned fellow spiritual practitioner occupying the position of guru. And why? Here the teacher is not one thing and the perfection of wisdom another. Just the perfection of wisdom is the teacher and just the teacher is the perfection of wisdom, so just the perfection of wisdom should be seen as the teacher. And why? It is because past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have appeared because they have trained in this perfection of wisdom, and any learned fellow spiritual practitioners, or bodhisattvas standing in the irreversible state, have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because they have trained in just this perfection of wisdom. Having trained in just this perfection of wisdom, those in the Śrāvaka  Vehicle have reached the state of a worthy one, those in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle have reached their own awakening, and bodhisattvas have entered into, enter into, and will enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva. Therefore, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who wants to directly witness tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas and wants to respect, revere, honor, and worship them with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners should write out just this perfection of wisdom in book form and respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners. 
 “When I fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and, seeing the force of this reality, thought, ‘What should I rely on and stay by, whom should I respect, revere, honor, and worship?’ Kauśika, I then saw among the creatures in this world with its celestial beings, Māras, śramaṇas, and brahmins none comparable to myself, and having considered the fact that there are none comparable to myself I again thought, ‘Well then, since this is the case, I should respect, revere, honor, and worship the Dharma to which I fully awakened, and I should rely on and stay by just that Dharma.’ And what is that Dharma, Kauśika? It is just this perfection of wisdom. It is just this perfection of wisdom that I myself, Kauśika, also respect, revere, honor, and worship, that I have respected, revered, honored, and worshiped, and that Irely on and stay by. 
 “So, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who wants to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening also should respect this perfection of wisdom; should revere, should honor, and should worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners; and should rely on it and stay by it, not to mention that those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have entered into the Śrāvaka Vehicle or who have entered into the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle should respect this perfection of wisdom; should revere, should honor, and should worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners; and should rely on it and stay by it too. And why? Because bodhisattvas have come about from the perfection of wisdom; tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have come about from bodhisattvas; and śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas have come about from tathāgatas. 
 Therefore, Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle, in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, and in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle should respect this perfection of wisdom that sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have fully awakened, will fully awaken, and are awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening have trained in, and they should revere, should honor, and should worship it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners.” 
This was the thirty-first chapter, “Physical Remains,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 32: The Superiority of Merit
“Kauśika,  there is infinitely great merit from establishing one being in the result of stream enterer, but not so much from establishing the beings in Jambudvīpa in the ten wholesome actions. And why? Kauśika, those who have been established in the ten wholesome actions have not totally got out from the forms of life in the hells, in the animal realms, in the worlds of Yama, or as asuras. A being established in the result of stream enterer is freed from all the terrible forms of life. Similarly, there is infinitely great merit from establishing one being in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, but not so much from establishing the beings in Jambudvīpa in the ten wholesome actions. Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who establishes one being in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening creates infinitely greater merit than that. And why? Because it is established specifically so the way of buddhas is not brought to an end. 
 “Kauśika, to establish a son of a good family or daughter of a good family in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening creates a lot of merit. And why? Because the Three Jewels have come about from a bodhisattva, and the Three Jewels are for the whole world to worship. Therefore, Kauśika, the creatures in this whole world with its celestial beings, Māras, śramaṇas, and brahmins should respect, revere, honor, and worship this bodhisattva with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family to establish  the beings in Jambudvīpa in the ten wholesome actions, what do you think, Kauśika? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “So then, Kauśika,” the Lord continued, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it on others for nothing but copying out and reading aloud creates even more merit than that. And why? Because in this perfection of wisdom are taught in detail those dharmas without outflows that a son of a good family or daughter of a good family has trained in when they have entered into, enter into, and will enter into the flawlessness that is a perfect state, up to when they have reached, will reach, and are reaching the state of a worthy one, and when they have entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva great being, and when they have fully awakened, awaken, and will awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “And what are those dharmas without outflows, Kauśika? They are these: the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the four noble truths, inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the ten tathāgata powers, up to the immeasurable buddhadharmas that tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have taught in detail in this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Therefore, Kauśika, you should also understand from this one of many explanations that those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who write out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestow it on others for nothing but copying out and reading aloud  create a lot more merit. 
 “And why? Because in this perfection of wisdom are taught in detail all those dharmas, dharmas on account of which there are great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and great sāla tree–like business families; there are the Cāturmahā­rājika gods and there are the Trāyastriṃśa, up to the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana gods; there are the perfections, up to there are the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to there is the knowledge of all aspects; and there are stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas.
 “Kauśika, let alone having established beings in Jambudvīpa in . . . up to a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, to establish as many beings as there are in this four-continent world system, all of them, in the ten wholesome actions, what do you think, Kauśika? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “So then, Kauśika,” said the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it on others for nothing but copying out and reading aloud creates a lot more merit. And why? Because all the dharmas of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, the dharmas of bodhisattvas, and the buddhadharmas have come about from the perfection of wisdom. 
Connect this in the same way with Kauśika, let alone having established beings that are in this four-continent world system in the ten wholesome actions, up to in the state of a worthy one and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, to establish beings that are in a thousandfold world system, all of them, in the ten wholesome actions, up to in the state of a worthy one and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, still a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it on others for nothing but copying out and reading aloud creates even more merit than that. 
Connect this in the same way with Kauśika, let alone having established beings that are in a thousandfold world system, even were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, to establish beings that are in a millionfold world system, all of them, in the ten wholesome actions, up to in the state of a worthy one and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, still a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it on others for nothing but copying out and reading aloud creates even more merit than that. 
Connect this in the same way with Kauśika, let alone having established beings that are in a millionfold world system in the ten wholesome actions, up to in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, even were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, to establish beings dwelling in the great billionfold world system, as many as there are, in the ten wholesome actions, up to a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, still, if a son of a good family or daughter of a good family has written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it on others for nothing but copying out and reading aloud, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family creates even more merit than that. 
Connect this in the same way with Kauśika, let alone the beings that are in the great billionfold world system,  even were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, to have established as many beings dwelling in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, all of them, in the ten wholesome actions, up to established them in the state of a worthy one and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, still, if a son of a good family or daughter of a good family has written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it on others for nothing but copying out and reading aloud, Kauśika, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family creates even more merit than that. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, if a son of a good family or daughter of a good family has established those beings who are in Jambudvīpa in the four concentrations, and has established them in the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, and the five clairvoyances, what do you think, Kauśika? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “So then, Kauśika,” said the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it on others for nothing but copying out and reading aloud creates even more merit than that. And why? Because in this perfection of wisdom all dharmas are taught in detail. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom creates a lot more merit, but there is not so much from a son of a good family or daughter of a good family establishing the beings in Jambudvīpa in the ten wholesome actions, the concentrations, the immeasurables, the formless absorptions, and  the clairvoyances.
 “There, properly paying attention is this: taking up, bearing in mind, reading aloud, mastering, and properly paying attention to this perfection of wisdom with an understanding that operates without duality; taking up, bearing in mind, reading aloud, mastering, and properly paying attention to the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving with an understanding that operates without duality; properly paying attention to inner emptiness with an understanding that operates without duality, up to properly paying attention to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature with an understanding that operates without duality; properly paying attention to the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and paths with an understanding that operates without duality; up to properly paying attention to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha and knowledge of all aspects with an understanding that operates without duality.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, some son of a good family or daughter of a good family may teach the perfection of wisdom to others in detail, explicate it, sort it out for them and give a commentary on it, or make it clear and give instruction in its meaning with this one of many explanations. There the meaning of the perfection of wisdom is this: not viewing the perfection of wisdom as two and not viewing it as not two, not viewing it as a causal sign or as not a causal sign, and not viewing it as brought in or as sent out, as taken away or as added on, as defilement or as purification, as a production or as a cessation, as grasped or as rejected, as stationed or as not stationed,  as true or as mistaken, as right or as wrong, as tiny or as not tiny, as a part or as not a part, as a dharma or as not a dharma, as suchness or as not suchness, or as the very limit of reality or as not the very limit of reality—this is the meaning of nondual. That son of a good family or daughter of a good family who teaches the perfection of wisdom to others in detail, explicates it, sorts it out for them and gives a commentary on it, and makes it clear and gives instruction in its meaning creates a lot of merit based on that, but not so much someone who just personally takes it up, bears it in mind, reads it aloud, masters it, and properly pays attention to it. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who teaches the perfection of wisdom to others in detail, gives advice about it, establishes it, sorts it out, makes it clear, and gives instruction in its meaning creates a lot more merit than someone who personally takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom.”
 “Exactly so, Lord; exactly so, Sugata,” said Śatakratu.
 “Thus, Kauśika,” continued the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family should give instructions in the perfection of wisdom, in both the meaning and the letter. If a son of a good family or daughter of a good family gives such instructions they will be endowed with infinite, countless, immeasurable masses of merit.
 “Even if a son of a good family or daughter of a good family respects, reveres, honors, and worships with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, with all the requirements for happiness, infinite, countless tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in each of the ten directions  for as long as they live, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who teaches the perfection of wisdom to others in detail with many different explanations, who makes it intelligible, sorts it out, gives a commentary on it, and makes it clear will create a lot more merit than that. And why? Because past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have fully awakened, will fully awaken, and are fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because they have trained in this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, compared with a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who practices the perfection of giving for infinite, incalculable eons by way of apprehending something, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who teaches and explains the perfection of wisdom in detail, up to worships it, if it is done without apprehending anything, creates a lot more merit than that.
 “Kauśika, there, what is it to apprehend something? If bodhisattvas who give a gift by way of apprehending something think, ‘I am giving a gift; this is a gift; it has been given to somebody else,’ they stand right in giving, and that is not the perfection of giving. If they think, ‘This is morality; I am being moral; I am guarding it for the sake of these beings,’ that is not the perfection of morality. If they think, ‘I am patient; this is patience;  I should be patient with others,’ that is not the perfection of patience. If they think, ‘I am making a vigorous effort; this is perseverance; I will continue persevering for their sake,’ that is not the perfection of perseverance. If they think, ‘I am becoming absorbed in concentration; this is concentration; I have become absorbed for their sake,’ that is not the perfection of concentration. If they think, ‘I am cultivating wisdom, this is wisdom, I will stay wise for their sake,’ that is not the perfection of wisdom. Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family’s perfection of giving by way of apprehending something like that is not complete, and the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom is not complete either.” 
 Śatakratu then asked, “Lord, what are bodhisattva great beings doing when the practice of the perfection of giving is complete, and when the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom are complete?” 
 “Kauśika,” said the Lord, “here when bodhisattva great beings give a gift by way of not apprehending a gift, giver, or recipient that is their perfection of giving; when not apprehending morality, being moral,  or a being that is their perfection of morality; when not apprehending patience, an object of patience, or having patience that is their perfection of patience; when not apprehending perseverance, something that has to be done, or a being that is their perfection of perseverance; when not apprehending concentration, somebody concentrating, or something that has to be concentrated on that is their perfection of concentration; and when not apprehending wisdom, being wise, or a topic to be wise about that is their perfection of wisdom. Kauśika, when bodhisattva great beings practice like that the perfection of giving becomes complete, and the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom become complete.” 
 “Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family should give instructions in both the meaning and the letter of the perfection of wisdom like that, and they should give such instructions in the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving as well. 
 “And why? Because at a time in the future, Kauśika, there will be sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who will teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom. There, having caused sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to listen to the counterfeit perfection of wisdom they will destroy them, because of not giving instructions in both the meaning and the letter of this perfection of wisdom.” 
 “Lord, what is a counterfeit perfection of wisdom?” asked Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” replied the Lord, “here, in regard to a counterfeit perfection of wisdom, sons of a good family and daughters of a good family teach something like it. A counterfeit perfection of wisdom is this: They teach ‘form is impermanent’ and that those who make such a practice are practicing the perfection of wisdom. Further, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who have been taught that explore whether ‘form is impermanent,’ and they explore whether ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is impermanent.’ 
 “And those who teach that counterfeit perfection of wisdom also practice a counterfeit perfection of wisdom. They teach ‘the eyes are impermanent,’ and they teach ‘the ears . . . ,’ ‘the nose . . . ,’ ‘the tongue . . . ,’ ‘the body . . . ,’ and ‘the thinking mind is impermanent.’ They teach ‘a form is impermanent,’ and they teach ‘a sound . . . ,’ ‘a smell . . . ,’ ‘a taste . . . ,’ ‘a feeling . . . ,’ and ‘dharmas are impermanent.’ They teach ‘the earth element is impermanent,’ and they teach ‘the water element . . . ,’ ‘the fire element . . . ,’ ‘the wind element . . . ,’ ‘the space element . . . ,’ and ‘the consciousness element is impermanent.’ They teach ‘the eye constituent is impermanent,’ and they teach ‘the ear constituent . . . ,’ ‘the nose constituent . . . ,’ ‘the taste constituent . . . ,’ ‘the body constituent . . . ,’ and ‘the thinking-mind constituent is impermanent.’ They teach ‘the form constituent is impermanent,’ and they teach ‘the sound constituent . . . ,’ ‘the smell constituent . . . ,’ ‘the taste constituent . . . ,’ ‘the touch constituent . . . ,’ and ‘the dharma constituent is impermanent.’ They teach ‘the eye consciousness constituent is impermanent,’ and they teach ‘the ear . . . ,’ ‘the nose . . . ,’ ‘the tongue . . . ,’ ‘the body . . .’ and ‘the thinking-mind consciousness constituent is impermanent.’ They teach ‘eye contact is impermanent,’ and they teach ‘ear . . . ,’ ‘nose . . . ,’ ‘tongue . . . ,’ ‘body . . . ,’  and ‘thinking-mind contact is impermanent.’ 
 “They teach ‘form is suffering,’ ‘is selfless,’ and ‘is unpleasant,’ and they teach ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is suffering,’ ‘is selfless,’ and ‘is unpleasant.’ 
 Similarly, they teach ‘the eye, form, and eye consciousness constituents are suffering, selfless, and unpleasant,’ and they teach ‘the ear, nose, tongue, body, thinking mind, dharma, and thinking-mind constituents are suffering, selfless, and unpleasant.’ 
Similarly, connect this with they teach a counterfeit perfection of concentration, and they teach a counterfeit perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving. They teach ‘form is impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant,’ and they teach ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant.’ 
Similarly, they teach ‘the eye, form, and eye consciousness constituents are impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant.’ 
Similarly, they teach ‘the ear . . . , nose . . . , tongue . . . , body . . . , and thinking mind, dharma, and thinking-mind constituents are impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant.’ 
Similarly, they teach ‘the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom are impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant.’ Similarly, they teach ‘the immeasurables and formless absorptions are impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant.’ They teach ‘the applications of mindfulness are impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant.’ They teach ‘the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path are impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant,’ up to they teach ‘the knowledge of all aspects is impermanent, suffering, selfless, and unpleasant.’ 
 “They say those who practice like that are practicing the perfection of wisdom. Kauśika, this is a counterfeit perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who teach the perfection of wisdom teach, ‘Sons of a good family and daughters of a good family, you should cultivate the perfection of wisdom. When you have cultivated the perfection of wisdom you will stand on the first level,’ up to ‘the tenth level.’ 
 Similarly, they teach, ‘When you have cultivated the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving you will stand on the first level,’ up to ‘you will stand on the tenth level.’ 
 “Still they cultivate that as the perfection of wisdom by way of a causal sign, by way of apprehending something, with a notion of time. Kauśika, this is a counterfeit perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family teach, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! You should cultivate the perfection of wisdom. When you have cultivated the perfection of wisdom  you will transcend the śrāvaka level and you will transcend the pratyekabuddha level.’ Kauśika, this is a counterfeit perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, when those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family teach those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle, they teach them, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! You should cultivate the perfection of wisdom. When you have cultivated the perfection of wisdom you will enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva.’ Kauśika, this is a counterfeit perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, when those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family teach those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle, they teach them, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! You should cultivate the perfection of wisdom. When you have cultivated the perfection of wisdom you will gain forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas. When you have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas, you will stand in the clairvoyance of a bodhisattva. When you stand in the clairvoyance of a bodhisattva, you will pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to respect, revere, honor, worship, and venerate the lord buddhas.’ In that way those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family, Kauśika, teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, when those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family teach those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle, ‘A son of a good family who takes up, bears in mind, reads aloud, masters, and properly pays attention to this perfection of wisdom becomes endowed with a countless, infinite, immeasurable  mass of merit,’ Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, when those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family teach those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Having rejoiced in the entire wholesome root, all of it, of past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas from their first production of the thought of awakening up to fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and compressed it into one, you should dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom.” 
 Śatakratu then asked, “Lord, when they do not teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom to those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have set out in the Great Vehicle, what do those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family teach?” 
 “Kauśika,” replied the Lord, “here, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family do not teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom to those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have set out in the Great Vehicle when they teach thus: ‘Come here, you son of a good family! When you cultivate the perfection of wisdom, do not even look at form as impermanent. And why? Because form is empty of the intrinsic nature of form. That intrinsic nature of form is nonexistent, and that which is nonexistent is the perfection of wisdom. So, in that perfection of wisdom you cannot say “form is permanent” or “form is impermanent.”  And why? Because form does not exist there, and given that, how could you ever view it as either permanent or impermanent?’ 
 Similarly, Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family do not teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom when they teach, ‘Do not even look at feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness as impermanent. And why? Because consciousness is empty of the intrinsic nature of consciousness. That intrinsic nature of consciousness is nonexistent, and that which is nonexistent is the perfection of wisdom. So, in that perfection of wisdom you cannot say “consciousness is permanent” or “consciousness is impermanent.” And why? Because consciousness does not exist there, and given that, how could you ever view it as either permanent or impermanent?’
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family cultivating the perfection of wisdom do not teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom when they teach, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! When you cultivate the perfection of wisdom, son of a good family, you should not look at any dharma at all. You should not stand on any dharma at all. And why? Because in the perfection of wisdom there is no dharma you have to go beyond and there is no dharma you have to stand on. And why? Because all dharmas are empty of an intrinsic nature. That dharma empty of an intrinsic nature is nonexistent, and that which is nonexistent is the perfection of wisdom. So, in that perfection of wisdom no dharma has been brought in or sent out,  no dharma arises or ceases.’
Similarly, connect this with the aggregates, the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, all the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha as well. 
 “Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family do not teach a counterfeit perfection of wisdom when they teach, ‘Son of a good family, you thus should not even look at the knowledge of all aspects as impermanent. And why? Because the knowledge of all aspects is empty of the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects. That intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects is nonexistent, and that which is nonexistent is the perfection of wisdom. So, in that perfection of wisdom you cannot say “the knowledge of all aspects is permanent” or “the knowledge of all aspects is impermanent.” And why? Because the knowledge of all aspects does not exist there, and given that, how could you ever view it as either permanent or impermanent?’
 “Therefore, Kauśika, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family should teach the meaning of the perfection of wisdom like that. When a son of a good family or daughter of a good family teaches like that, they create a lot more merit. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family to establish the beings in Jambudvīpa, as many as there are, in the result of stream enterer, what do you think, Kauśika? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu. 
 “So then, Kauśika,” the Lord continued, “when a son of a good family or daughter of a good family gives a discourse to others and explains, reveals, makes clear, and illuminates both the meaning and the letter of the perfection of wisdom with many explanations, saying, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom, and focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded,’ they create a lot more merit. And why? Kauśika, it is because a stream enterer and the result of stream enterer have come about from this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Kauśika, let alone having led the beings in Jambudvīpa to the result of stream enterer, and let alone having led all the beings in a thousandfold world system to the result of stream enterer, and let alone having led all the beings in a millionfold world system to the result of stream enterer, and let alone having led all the beings in the great billionfold world system to the result of stream enterer, Kauśika, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family to have established in the result of stream enterer as many beings standing in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, and similarly, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family to have established in the result of stream enterer as many beings standing in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the southern, western, and northern directions, the intermediate directions, below and above, what do you think? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot,  Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “So then, Kauśika,” the Lord continued, “when a son of a good family or daughter of a good family teaches both the meaning and the letter of the perfection of wisdom to others in detail and explains, illuminates, reveals, gives a commentary on, and makes them clear, saying, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom, and focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded,’ they create a lot more merit. And why? Kauśika, it is because a stream enterer has come about from this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family to establish all the beings in Jambudvīpa, as many as there are, in the result of once-returner, were to establish them in the result of non-returner, up to the state of a worthy one, what do you think, Kauśika? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “So then, Kauśika,” the Lord continued, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who explains in detail to others, up to illuminates both the meaning and the letter of the perfection of wisdom with many explanations, saying, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom, and focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded,’ they create a lot more merit. And why? Kauśika, it is because . . . up to the state of a worthy one has come about from  this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Kauśika, let alone having led the beings in Jambudvīpa to . . . up to the state of a worthy one, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family to have established all the beings in the four continents in . . . up to the state of a worthy one, to have established the beings in a thousandfold world system, the beings in a millionfold world system, the beings in a great billionfold world system in . . . up to the state of a worthy one, Kauśika, or were they even to have established as many beings standing in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, all of them, in . . . up to the state of a worthy one, what do you think? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “So then, Kauśika,” the Lord continued, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who illuminates and explains this perfection of wisdom to others, saying, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Take up, up to master this perfection of wisdom, focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded,’ they create a lot more merit. And why? Kauśika, it is because once-returners, non-returners, and worthy ones have come about from this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family to establish all the beings, as many as there are, standing in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the ten directions, in the state of a pratyekabuddha, what do you think, Kauśika? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?” 
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” repled Śatakratu.
 “So then, Kauśika,” the Lord continued, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who teaches, up to illuminates both the meaning and the words to those who want this perfection of wisdom, saying, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Take up this perfection of wisdom. Master it. Focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded,’ they create a lot more merit. And why? Kauśika, it is because a pratyekabuddha has come about from this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, compared with some son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has established the beings in Jambudvīpa in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family creates a lot more merit when explaining in detail, up to illuminating both the meaning and the words to those who want this perfection of wisdom, saying, ‘To the extent that you, son of a good family, train in this perfection of wisdom, to that extent you will gain the dharmas of the knowledge of all aspects; to the extent you gain the dharmas of the knowledge of all aspects, to that extent your vast cultivation of the perfection of wisdom will become completed; to the extent your vast cultivation of the perfection of wisdom becomes completed, to that extent you will be closer and closer to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening’; connect this in the same way with each, up to ‘you will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ And why? Kauśika, it is because bodhisattvas who have produced the first thought of awakening have come about from this perfection of wisdom, and as many bodhisattvas as there are, all of them, standing in as many world systems in each direction of the ten directions as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River have come about from it  and have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family to establish all the beings, as many as there are, standing in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each direction of the ten directions, in the irreversible state, what do you think, Kauśika? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Śatakratu.
 “So then, Kauśika,” the Lord continued, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who explains, up to illuminates both the meaning and the words of this perfection of wisdom to others, saying, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Take up, up to focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded. To the extent that you, son of a good family, focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded, to that extent you will gain the dharmas of the knowledge of all aspects’; connect this in the same way with each, up to ‘you will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ they, Kauśika, will create a lot more merit. And why? Kauśika, it is because irreversible bodhisattvas have come about from this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, compared with all the beings in Jambudvīpa, as many as there are, having set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family, Kauśika, creates a lot more merit when explaining, up to illuminating both the meaning and the words of this perfection of wisdom for them, saying,  ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Take up this perfection of wisdom, up to focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded. To the extent that you, son of a good family, focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded, to that extent you will have trained in this perfection of wisdom and will stand in the irreversible state and gradually fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, compared with some son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has established the beings standing in the four continents; or the beings standing in a thousandfold world system, in a millionfold world system, or in the great billionfold world system; or the beings, as many as there are, in as many world systems in each of the ten directions as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, all of them, in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family creates a lot more merit when explaining and illuminating both the meaning and the words of the perfection of wisdom for those beings, saying, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! Take up this perfection of wisdom, up to focus in your practice on this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded. By focusing on it you will stand in the irreversible state and gradually fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ 
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, compared with some son of a good family or daughter of a good family who establishes all the beings, as many as there are, in Jambudvīpa in the state irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect,  complete awakening and explains, up to illuminates both the meaning and the words of this perfection of wisdom to them, some son of a good family or daughter of a good family creates a lot more merit from teaching both the meaning and the words of this perfection of wisdom to a single one among them who says, ‘I want quickly to awaken fully to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ 
 “Compared with someone who establishes as many being as there are standing in as many world systems in each of the ten directions as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, all of them, in the irreversible state, and explains this perfection of wisdom to them, someone creates a lot more merit from teaching both the meaning and the words of this perfection of wisdom to one among them who says, ‘I want quickly to awaken fully to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ ”
 “Lord,” said Śatakratu, “to the extent that bodhisattva great beings are closer and closer to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, to that very extent bodhisattva great beings have to be advised and instructed in this perfection of wisdom, have to be advised and instructed in the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving; have to be advised and instructed in all the emptinesses; have to be advised and instructed in the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and paths;  and have to be advised and instructed in the ten tathāgata powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. 
 “They have to be taken care of with requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses. 
 “Those bodhisattva great beings have to be taken care of with a combination of both the dharmas beginning with the perfections and the required material things. 
 “Taking care of them with both instruction in the dharmas and with the required material things creates more merit than the earlier two done separately. 
 “And why? Because it thus happens that bodhisattva great beings taken care of with the requirements are advised and instructed in the perfections, are advised and instructed in all the emptinesses, are advised and instructed in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and are advised and instructed in the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Excellent, Kauśika, excellent that you have produced enthusiasm in sons of a good family or daughters of a good family, those bodhisattva great beings in the Great Vehicle. It is your work. Noble śrāvakas who want to look after beings should produce an enthusiasm for bodhisattva great beings fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They should take care of and protect bodhisattva great beings with a combination of doctrine and material things. And why? Lord, it is because the śrāvaka saṅgha comes about from them, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle comes about from them, and the Great Vehicle also comes about from them. Were bodhisattva great beings not to have produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,  and were bodhisattva great beings not to have trained in the six perfections, and not to have trained in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, they would not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they abolish the hells of all world systems, abolish the birthplaces of the animal world, and abolish all the regions of ghosts. Great sāla tree–like royal families appear, great sāla tree–like brahmin families appear, and great sāla tree–like business families appear. The Cāturmahā­rājika gods appear, there are the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapurohita, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, and Śuddhāvāsa—Avṛha, Sudṛśa, Sudarśana, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha—gods, and there are the Ākāśānantyāyatana,  the Vijñānānantyāyatana, Ākiṃcityāyatana, and Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana gods. The perfection of giving appears in the world, and the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom appear in the world. Inner emptiness, up to and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature appears in the world; and the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening appear in the world, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha appear in the world. The Śrāvaka Vehicle, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the Great Vehicle appear in the world.”
This was the thirty-second chapter, “The Superiority of Merit,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 33: Dedication
Then the bodhisattva great being Maitreya said to the elder Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, when the basis of meritorious action arisen from a bodhisattva great being’s rejoicing that has been made into something shared in common by all beings has been dedicated to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—and dedicated, furthermore, by way of not apprehending anything—that basis of meritorious action arisen from a bodhisattva great being’s rejoicing  that has been made into something shared in common by all beings and dedicated to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is the highest, the most excellent, the foremost, the best, the most superb, sublime, unsurpassed, and unrivaled in comparison to the bases of meritorious action arisen from all beings’ rejoicing, and in comparison to the bases of meritorious action arisen from giving, the bases of meritorious action arisen from morality, and the bases of meritorious action arisen from meditation of those who have set out in the Śrāvaka Vehicle and those who have set out in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle. And why? Because all the bases of meritorious action arisen from giving, arisen from morality, and arisen from meditation of those in the Śrāvaka Vehicle and those in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle are made for personal disciplining, for personal calming, and for a personal complete nirvāṇa; the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness are for personal disciplining, personal calming, and a personal complete nirvāṇa, but that basis of meritorious action arisen from a bodhisattva’s rejoicing is for disciplining all beings, for calming all beings, and for the complete nirvāṇa of all beings, because it has been dedicated to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, “There are the wholesome roots endowed with the six perfections of all the infinite, countless, immeasurable lord buddhas in each of the world systems in infinite, countless world systems in the eastern direction who have passed into complete nirvāṇa, starting from when they first produced the thought, up to when they fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, up to complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, during  the lasting of their good Dharma up to its disappearance. There are the bases of meritorious action arisen from giving, arisen from morality, and arisen from meditation of those śrāvakas of theirs in the Śrāvaka Vehicle and those pratyekabuddhas of theirs in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle and the wholesome roots without outflows of their trainees and nontrainees. There are the aggregates of morality, aggregates of meditative stabilization, aggregates of wisdom, aggregates of liberation, and aggregates of knowledge and seeing of liberation of those tathāgatas; and there are the wholesome roots planted by wishes to benefit, great compassion, and the infinite, countless buddhadharmas, those planted by the Dharma teachings those lord buddhas gave and those planted, on account of those Dharma teachings, by those who reached the result of stream enterer, up to the state of a worthy one, up to those who reached a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and those who have entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva. Bodhisattva great beings, having compressed together all those wholesome roots that those tathāgatas, present or in complete nirvāṇa, produced, rejoice in them with the highest rejoicing, rejoice with the best, superb, sublime, loftiest, unsurpassed, unrivaled, unequaled, equal to the unequaled rejoicing, and, having made the wholesome root arisen from that rejoicing into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening with the thought, ‘May this foster unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’  Maitreya, when those bodhisattvas in the Great Vehicle mentally dedicate like that, as explained, do those objective supports and entities, the objective supports and entities that have produced that state of mind, exist, or are they apprehended as are the causal signs a son of a good family has grasped?”
 The bodhisattva great being Maitreya replied, “Venerable monk Subhūti, those objective supports and entities do not exist and are not apprehended any more than the causal signs those sons of a good family in the Great Vehicle grasp and dedicate to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Subhūti then asked, “If, with those objective supports that do not exist and those entities that do not exist, having grasped the causal marks of those lord buddhas standing in all the vast world systems in the ten directions, they compress together all those wholesome roots starting from when they first produced the thought up to the disappearance of their good Dharma, together with all the wholesome roots of their trainees and nontrainees in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, and dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, would it not be just as it is with the wrong perception, wrong thought, wrong view of impermanence as permanent, suffering as ‘happiness,’ selflessness as ‘self,’ and the unpleasant as ‘pleasant’? And if, just as it is with the entities and how it is with the objective supports too, awakening is like that; if thought is like that; if the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom are like that;  if the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are like that; and if the tathāgata powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are like that as well, then what would the entities there be, what would the objective supports be, what would meditative stabilization be, what would thought be, what would the wholesome roots be, what would thought arisen from rejoicing be, and what would dedication to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening be?”
 “Venerable monk Subhūti,” replied Maitreya, “if those bodhisattva great beings again and again practice the six perfections, attend on many buddhas, produce wholesome roots, are assisted by spiritual friends, and again and again train in all dharmas empty of their own marks, they dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening without grasping the causal signs of those entities, those objective supports, those lord buddhas, those wholesome roots, or those bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing.  They dedicate them in a nondual way, in a way free from causal marks, as they really are without dedicating them by way of apprehending or by way of not apprehending, by way of defilement or by way of purification, or by way of production or by way of cessation. If those bodhisattva great beings have not trained in the six perfections, have not attended on many buddhas, have not produced wholesome roots, are not assisted by spiritual friends, and have not trained in all dharmas empty of their own marks, they grasp the causal signs of those entities, those objective supports, those wholesome roots, and those bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing and dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Venerable monk Subhūti, you should not give an exposition of this doctrine of the perfection of wisdom that has been explained like this in the presence of bodhisattvas who have newly set out in the vehicle, and similarly you should not explain the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving, or explain inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. And why? Because even the smidgeon of faith, smidgeon of serene confidence, smidgeon of liking, and smidgeon of veneration they have will disappear. The exposition and explanation have to be given in the presence of bodhisattvas irreversible from awakening, and the teaching should be up to dharmas being empty of their own marks. Having heard things like that, those bodhisattva great beings will not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified. If they  have been assisted by spiritual friends, served the victors of the past well, produced wholesome roots, and attended on many buddhas, they will be, venerable monk Subhūti, those whose bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing will be dedicated in that way to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” 
 “Maitreya,” said Subhūti, “the thought that does the rejoicing and dedication is a thought that is extinguished, stopped, nonexistent, and has run out. And those entities and those objective supports, those wholesome roots, and those bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing are extinguished, stopped, nonexistent, and have run out. So, what, then, is the thought arisen from rejoicing, what are those entities, what are those objective supports, and what are those wholesome roots, and what is dedication to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Does thought dedicate thought? If thought were to dedicate thought, there would be no coming together of two thoughts. The intrinsic nature of thought cannot be dedicated.”
 Maitreya replied, “When bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom thus know the perfection of wisdom is a nonexistent thing; the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving are nonexistent things; form is a nonexistent thing; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are nonexistent things, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are nonexistent things; the tathāgata powers, fearlessnesses,  detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are nonexistent things; and awakening is a nonexistent thing, such bodhisattva great beings will be those whose bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing will be dedicated in that way to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. If dedicated like that, it is a dedication to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya then asked the elder Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle hear this doctrine would they not tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified? Venerable monk Subhūti, how then could bodhisattva great beings newly set out in the vehicle dedicate those wholesome roots? And even if they have appropriated those bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing, how will they dedicate those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “Maitreya,” replied Subhūti, “when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who have newly set out in the vehicle take up that perfection of wisdom it is by way of not apprehending anything, not by way of a causal sign; and similarly, when practicing the perfection of concentration . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of morality . . . and the perfection of giving they take up the perfection of giving by way of not apprehending anything, not by way of a causal sign. When they are practicing inner emptiness and take up inner emptiness it is by way of not apprehending anything, not by way of a causal sign; when they are practicing . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature and take up the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature it is by way of not apprehending anything, not by way of a causal sign; when they are practicing the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening and take up the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening it is by way of not apprehending anything, not by way of a causal sign; and when they are practicing the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha and take them up it is by way of not apprehending anything, not by way of a causal sign. 
 “Thus they come to have more belief in the perfection of wisdom; come to have more belief in the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving; come to have more belief in inner emptiness; come to have more belief in . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; come to have more belief in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; and come to have more belief in the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Spiritual friends also look after them, and spiritual friends teach both the meaning and the words of just that perfection of wisdom, up to the perfection of giving as well. No matter what, they teach so they are not separated from the perfection of wisdom up until entering into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and similarly, so that there is no separation from all the perfections up until entering into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and so that they are not separated from all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.  They point out the work of Māra, and, having heard about those works of Māra from them, no decrease happens and no increase happens. And why? Because those works of Māra cannot be apprehended through their intrinsic nature. They are not separated from the lord buddhas up until they have entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva. They plant wholesome roots in relation to them, and on account of these wholesome roots they grasp the bodhisattva lineage and never leave the bodhisattva lineage up until fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Furthermore, Maitreya, bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle should compress together the merit accumulations and the wholesome roots planted by the lord buddhas whose path has come to an end, whose thought constructions and cravings for existence have been cut off, for whom the path of speech has ended, and who have laid down their burden, have removed the thorns, have cut the fetters that bind to becoming, and are freed by knowledge of sameness—the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in infinite, countless world systems in the ten directions; those planted by the śrāvakas of those lord buddhas, as well as those wholesome roots planted in relation to them; and the wholesome roots planted in the great sāla tree–like royal families in the world, the great sāla tree–like brahmin families, the great sāla tree–like business families in the world, the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to and the Śuddhāvāsa gods. They should compress them all together and collect them into one and weigh it, and having done so they should rejoice in it with the highest rejoicing and dedicate the bases of meritorious action arisen from that rejoicing with the most excellent, foremost, best, most superb, and most sublime  rejoicing to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Maitreya then asked, “Venerable monk Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle consider the wholesome roots planted by the lord buddhas and their śrāvaka saṅghas and rejoice with the highest rejoicing, rejoice with . . . up to unrivaled rejoicing, and dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, how do those bodhisattva great beings not have a wrong perception, wrong thought, and wrong view?”
 “Maitreya,” replied Subhūti, “if bodhisattva great beings, while focusing on the lord buddhas and their śrāvaka saṅghas as is their habit, have no notion of buddha, have no notion of wholesome roots, and have no notion of a thought doing the dedication, bodhisattva great beings making such a dedication will not have a wrong perception, wrong thought, or wrong view.
 “If, while considering the lord buddhas and those wholesome roots, bodhisattva great beings grasp a causal sign, and, having grasped a causal sign, rejoice and dedicate like that to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they will have a wrong perception, thought, and view.
 “If bodhisattva great beings understand the lord buddhas, those wholesome roots, and the thoughts that habitually focus, and that are extinguished, as extinguished; and understand that what has been extinguished cannot be dedicated; and understand the thought with which the dedication is done, and its dharmic nature,  and understand that what it is being dedicated to and its true dharmic nature are like that too—if bodhisattva great beings have dedicated like that it is a conforming dedication and it is a perfect dedication, not a nonconforming dedication and not a distorted dedication, so the dedication should be done like that. 
 “If bodhisattva great beings compress together the wholesome roots that past, future, and present lord buddhas, up to ordinary persons have planted; the wholesome roots planted by listening to Dharma teachings and planted by the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas in relation to that; the wholesome roots planted by the great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, great sāla tree–like business families, and the Cāturmahā­rājika gods listening to the Dharma; and all the productions of the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—and if, having compressed them all together and collected them into one and weighed it, they rejoice in it with the highest rejoicing, rejoice with the most excellent, foremost, best, most superb, and most sublime rejoicing, rejoice with an unequaled rejoicing equal to the unequaled, and, having rejoiced, dedicate it all to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and if they perfectly understand that those dharmas are extinguished, stopped, nonexistent, and have run out, and that those dharmas for the sake of which the dedication is done are also ‘empty of an intrinsic nature’—if they dedicate like that, they will have made a dedication to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “If they perfectly understand  that dharmas do not dedicate dharmas—and why? because ‘all dharmas are empty of an intrinsic nature’—and if they dedicate it that way, they will have made a dedication to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom like that will not have a wrong perception, wrong thought, or wrong view of the perfections of concentration, perseverance, patience, morality, or giving. And why? Because they do not settle down on that dedication, those wholesome roots, that awakening, or that thought—they do not even see what is settled down on. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ dedication to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “If bodhisattva great beings are aware that the piling up of the bases of meritorious action is isolated from the aggregates; are aware that it is isolated from the perfection of wisdom; are aware that it is isolated from the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving; are aware that it is isolated from inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; are aware that it is isolated from the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; and are aware that it is isolated from the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, in that case bodhisattva great beings will have dedicated the bases of meritorious action to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “If bodhisattva great beings are aware that the bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing  are isolated from an intrinsic nature of the bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing and are aware that the lord buddhas are isolated from an intrinsic nature of buddhas, that wholesome roots are isolated from an intrinsic nature of wholesome roots, that piling up is isolated from an intrinsic nature of piling up, that the thought of awakening is isolated from an intrinsic nature of the thought of awakening, that a dedicating thought is isolated from an intrinsic nature of a dedicating thought, that awakening is isolated from an intrinsic nature of awakening, that the perfection of wisdom is isolated from an intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom, and similarly, that the perfection of concentration . . . perseverance . . . patience . . . morality . . . and giving is isolated from an intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving; that inner emptiness, up to that the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is isolated from an intrinsic nature of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; up to that the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . the ten powers . . . the four fearlessnesses . . . the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are isolated from an intrinsic nature of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, bodhisattva great beings will thus practice the perfection of wisdom that is isolated, and that will be the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom. 
 “Furthermore, bodhisattva great beings recollecting those wholesome roots of those lord buddhas who have passed into nirvāṇa should make the dedication in just such a way that the thought with which the dedication is made, like the dedication, is true suchness, has that as its basic nature, and is that intrinsic nature. A dedication with such awareness will have been to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.  Such a dedication does not have a wrong perception, wrong thought, or wrong view. 
 “If bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom know those wholesome roots of those lord buddhas by way of a causal sign, the dedication is not to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “If they were to grasp a causal sign while thus recollecting those past lord buddhas—who have passed into nirvāṇa, have no causal signs, and are not objects—they would not have dedicated those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. In that case it would be a wrong perception, wrong thought, and wrong view. 
 “If they do not form a knowledge of and do not grasp at a causal sign of those lord buddhas, of those wholesome roots, of those accumulations, or of those productions of the thought, those wholesome roots are dedicated to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and thus the bodhisattva great beings do not have a wrong perception, wrong thought, or wrong view.”
 “Venerable monk Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings not grasp at causal signs and still make a dedication?” asked Maitreya.
 “Maitreya,” replied Subhūti, “it is because bodhisattva great beings have trained in skillful means in this perfection of wisdom. Therefore, you should know that bodhisattva great beings are skilled in the perfection of wisdom. Without having resorted to the perfection of wisdom it is not possible to dedicate the bases of meritorious action.”
 Maitreya then asked, “Venerable monk Subhūti, would there not be this fault  if, in the perfection of wisdom, those lord buddhas, those wholesome roots, those accumulations, and those productions of the thought dedicated to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening were not to exist?”
 “There, bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom should reflect deeply as follows: Those physical beings, those wholesome roots, and those accumulations have ceased, but still they conceive of them, having grasped them as causal signs—having grasped those lord buddhas, those wholesome roots, those accumulations, and those productions of the thought dedicated to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening as causal signs. Tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas do not do the work of dedication and rejoicing by way of causal signs like that. And why? Because it is just this—the apprehension of those lord buddhas who have passed into complete nirvāṇa having grasped a causal sign and conceived of them, that is their great big apprehension. So, bodhisattva great beings who want to dedicate those wholesome roots should not dedicate them having apprehended and grasped them as causal signs. Tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas do not say that there is great value in the dedication of those perceiving apprehended objects and perceiving causal signs. And why? Because that dedication has been poisoned and conceals a sharp object. 
 “To illustrate, a person with a naturally childish disposition decides to eat a poisoned delicacy that looks and smells good, and even while eating it enjoys its color and aroma. But when they have digested it suffering results. 
 “Similarly, here certain persons who have taken this perfection of wisdom up wrongly,  know wrongly, and have trained wrongly give instructions without understanding or comprehending the true state of affairs, saying, ‘Come here, you son of a good family! There are the wholesome roots created through the practice of the perfection of wisdom by past, future, and present lord buddhas starting from when they first produced the thought, up to when they fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, up to complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, during the lasting of their good Dharma up to its disappearance. Similarly there are the wholesome roots they created through their practice of the perfection of concentration, perseverance, patience, morality, and giving; the wholesome roots they created endowed with the four concentrations and endowed with the four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, ten tathāgata powers, fearlessnesses, and detailed and thorough knowledges; and the wholesome roots they created endowed with the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. There are those on account of which the lord buddhas purify buddhafields and bring beings to maturity and on account of which there are their aggregates of morality, aggregates of meditative stabilization, aggregates of wisdom, aggregates of liberation, up to aggregates of knowledge and seeing of liberation, up to knowledge of a knower of all aspects, up to the natural state not robbed of mindfulness, and constantly staying in a state of equanimity. There are the wholesome roots those in their Śrāvaka Vehicle  have produced and possess, and there are the wholesome roots created by those prophesied as pratyekabuddhas and by the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas. Having compressed them all together and collected them into one and weighed it, you should dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ That sort of dedication of theirs is a dedication by way of causal signs and by way of apprehended objects. It is like poisoned food that becomes toxic. 
 “A dedication viewing an apprehended object is not a dedication. And why? Because that apprehending is poisonous, has a causal sign, has causes, and has conditions. Such a dedication is demeaning to the Tathāgata. It is not speaking as the Tathāgata said to speak. It is not speaking the Dharma. They should reflect deeply like that. 
 “There sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle should train like this, asking, ‘How should we rejoice in and dedicate the wholesome roots of past, future, and present lord buddhas? How should we rejoice in and dedicate the wholesome roots they, along with the śrāvaka saṅghas, accumulated practicing the perfection of wisdom, starting from when they first produced the thought, up to complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, during the lasting of their good Dharma up to its disappearance, up to gaining the knowledge of all aspects, up to how should they rejoice in and dedicate the wholesome roots planted by the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas? How should we dedicate those wholesome roots  so they are dedicated to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’ 
 “Sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle practicing the perfection of wisdom who do not want to demean the Tathāgata should frame their dedication in these terms: ‘I shall rejoice in those wholesome roots just as the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas with their unsurpassed buddha knowledge comprehend them as existing in their basic character, nature, signs, and true dharmic nature, and I shall dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening just as the lord buddhas comprehend them.’ Sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle should dedicate wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening like that. Such a dedication is not demeaning to the Tathāgata. It is speaking like the Tathāgata said to, and is speaking the Dharma. That sort of dedication of those bodhisattva great beings has not been poisoned. That is how they should train.
 “Furthermore, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have set out in the Great Vehicle and are practicing the perfection of wisdom should dedicate those wholesome roots like this: ‘Thus form does not belong to the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm. Feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not belong to the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm. Similarly, the constituents, sense fields, and the perfection of wisdom do not belong to the desire realm, form realm,  or formless realm. Similarly, the perfections of concentration, perseverance, patience, morality, and giving do not belong to the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm, and that which does not belong is not past, is not future, and is not present. Similarly, inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature do not belong to the desire, form, or formless realm. The thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening do not belong to the desire, form, or formless realm. The ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha do not belong to the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm. Similarly, suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element, morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation, the knowledge of all aspects, the natural state not robbed of mindfulness, and constantly staying in a state of equanimity do not belong to the desire, form, or formless realm, and that which does not belong is not past, is not future, and is not present.
 “And why? Just as they do not belong because they do not belong in that way, similarly dedication does not belong either. The dharma to which they are dedicating and those dharmas do not belong. The one doing the dedication  also does not belong. The lord buddhas also do not belong; those wholesome roots do not belong; those śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas do not belong; and their wholesome roots do not belong to the desire, form, or formless realm either, and that which does not belong is not past, is not future, and is not present. That is how they should make the dedication.
 “If bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom have this awareness—‘Thus form, whatever it is, does not belong to the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm. Similarly, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not belong to the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm. Similarly, the constituents and sense fields do not belong to the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm, and that which does not belong is not past, is not future, and is not present. It cannot be dedicated by way of causal signs or by way of apprehended objects. And why? Because it has no intrinsic nature, and something without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. A nonexistent thing cannot dedicate a nonexistent thing. Similarly, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, and the constituents and sense fields; similarly, the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; similarly inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature;  similarly the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, the knowledge of all aspects, the natural state not robbed of mindfulness, and constantly staying in a state of equanimity does not belong to the desire realm, do not belong to the form realm, and do not belong to the formless realm, and that which does not belong is not past, is not future, and is not present. That which is not past, that which is not future, and that which is not present cannot be dedicated by way of causal signs or by way of apprehended objects. And why? Because it has no intrinsic nature, and something without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. A nonexistent thing cannot dedicate a nonexistent thing’—if bodhisattvas have just such awareness, then the dedication has not been poisoned. 
 “A son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has set out in the Great Vehicle and who dedicates those wholesome roots by way of causal signs and by way of apprehended objects dedicates those wholesome roots in the wrong way and does not dedicate perfectly. The lord buddhas do not praise a dedication that is wrong. Those who dedicate with a dedication not praised by the lord buddhas do not complete the perfection of giving and do not complete the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom. Those who do not complete the six perfections  do not complete the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening and do not complete inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They do not complete a buddhafield. Those who do not complete a buddhafield do not complete bringing beings to maturity. Those who do not complete a buddhafield and do not complete bringing beings to maturity do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “And why? Because a dedication like that has been poisoned. 
 “Furthermore, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should reflect deeply as follows: ‘Those lord buddhas comprehended that they must dedicate wholesome roots in this truly dharmic way. I too must dedicate these wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in just this truly dharmic way as well.’ They should reflect deeply like that.”
 Then the Lord said to venerable Subhūti, “Excellent, excellent, Subhūti! It is excellent that you have given such instruction about the bodhisattva great beings’ aggregate of dedication by way of no causal sign, by way of not apprehending anything, by way of no production, by way of no appearance, by way of no defilement, by way of no purification, by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, by way of the emptiness of its own mark, by way of the dharma-constituent, by way of suchness, by way of unmistaken suchness, and by way of unaltered suchness.
 “Subhūti, if all the beings that are in the great billionfold world system  were to obtain the ten wholesome actions and were to obtain the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, and the five clairvoyances, what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would those beings create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who makes an untainted dedication of the wholesome roots creates even more merit than that. Subhūti, that dedication of the wholesome roots by that son of a good family or daughter of a good family is the highest, the most excellent, foremost, the best, superb, sublime, unsurpassed, and unrivaled.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if as many beings as there are stationed in the great billionfold world system were to become stream enterers or were to become once-returners, or non-returners, or worthy ones, and were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family for as long as they live to respect, revere, honor, and worship them all with requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who makes an untainted dedication of the wholesome roots creates even more merit  than that. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if as many beings as there are stationed in the great billionfold world system were to become pratyekabuddhas, and were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family for as long as they live to respect, revere, honor, and worship them all with requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who makes an untainted dedication of the wholesome roots creates even more merit than that. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if as many beings as there are stationed in the great billionfold world system had set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and as many beings standing in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, all of them, for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, were to respect, revere, honor, and worship each of those bodhisattvas there with requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—and attend on them with all the requirements for happiness, and similarly, if as many beings standing in as many world systems in the south, west, and north, below and above, and the intermediate directions as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, all of them, for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, were to respect, revere, honor, and worship each of those bodhisattvas from among those bodhisattvas there with requirements (robes, alms, beds  and seats, and medicines for sicknesses) and attend on them with all the requirements for happiness, what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata; an infinite, countless, immeasurable amount,” replied Subhūti. “Lord, to give an illustration for that basis of meritorious action is not easy. Lord, if that basis of meritorious action had a physical form it would not fit in even as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said this, the Lord said to him, “Excellent, excellent, Subhūti! What you have said is excellent. 
 “Subhūti, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who, with an untainted dedication of the wholesome roots, dedicates to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening the wholesome roots like that creates even more merit than that. Therefore, Subhūti, that dedication of the wholesome roots by that son of a good family or daughter of a good family is the highest, the most excellent, foremost, the best, superb, sublime, unsurpassed, and unrivaled. Subhūti, that earlier mass of merit does not approach the merit of an untainted dedication even by a hundredth part, or by a thousandth part, or by a hundred thousandth part, or by a hundred millionth part, or by a thousandth one hundred millionth part, or by a hundred thousandth one hundred millionth part; it does not stand up to any number, or fraction, or counting, or example, or comparison. 
 “And why? Because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family  are endowed with the ten wholesome actions and endowed with the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, and the five clairvoyances while having a perception that apprehends something. 
 “And why? Because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family respect, revere, honor, and worship with the requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—while having a perception that apprehends something. They attend on those bodhisattvas caught up in apprehending things with all the requirements for happiness, and they respect, revere, honor, and worship them.” 
 Then twenty thousand gods from among the Cāturmahā­rājika gods cupped their palms together in a gesture of supplication, bowed to the Lord, and said, “Ah! Lord, bodhisattva great beings with skillful means dedicate those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in an untainted way, by way of not apprehending anything, by way of no causal sign, by way of not doing anything. The dedication done like this without asserting ‘two’ or ‘not two’ is a great dedication.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, together with the Trāyastriṃśa gods, having brought divine flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, worshiped the Lord with a divine orchestra of cymbals and drums and made this statement: “These bodhisattva great beings with skillful means dedicate those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening by way of not apprehending anything, in an untainted way,  by way of no causal sign. The dedication done like this without asserting ‘two’ or ‘not two’ is a great dedication.”
 Then many hundred thousand one hundred million billion Brahmakāyika gods approached the Lord, and, having arrived, bowed to his feet with their heads, melodiously giving voice to and proclaiming the words, “Lord, it is amazing how the wholesome roots of bodhisattva great beings with such a perfection of wisdom and skillful means as their mentor surpass those of the aforementioned bodhisattva great beings and sons of a good family or daughters of a good family caught up in apprehending things.”
 Similarly, the Brahmakāyika gods and the Brahmapurohita, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Anabhrakā, Puṇyaprasava, Bṛhatphala, Avṛha, Sudarśana, Sudṛśa, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha gods, together with many hundred thousand one hundred million billion gods, approached the Lord and, having arrived, bowed to his feet with their heads, proclaiming the words, “Lord, it is amazing how the wholesome roots of bodhisattva great beings with such a perfection of wisdom and skillful means as their mentor surpass those of the aforementioned bodhisattva great beings and sons of a good family or daughters of a good family practicing while caught up in apprehending things.”
 Then the Lord said to the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha gods, “Gods, were all the beings that are in a great billionfold world system  to have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and were they all to compress together the wholesome roots that past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas together with their śrāvaka saṅghas planted, starting from when they first produced the thought up to for as long as their good Dharma lasts (in these are the wholesome roots of those śrāvakas, of those pratyekabuddhas, and of all other beings, arisen from the perfection of giving and arisen from the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom, and the aggregates of morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation, and immeasurable other buddhadharmas), and were they to rejoice in them and, having rejoiced, dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening by way of apprehending something; and were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to compress together the wholesome roots of the perfection of giving, up to the perfection of wisdom, up to immeasurable other buddhadharmas of those past, future, and present lord buddhas together with their śrāvaka saṅghas starting from when they first produced the thought, up to for as long as their good Dharma lasts, and rejoice in all that with the highest rejoicing, and, having rejoiced, dedicate that to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening by way of not apprehending anything, in a nondual way, by way of no causal sign, in an untainted way, by way of not doing anything, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family would thus create more merit than those earlier sons of a good family or daughters of a good family.  That earlier wholesome root, furthermore, would not approach even by a hundredth part, up to would not stand up to any comparison to this wholesome root. That dedication by a bodhisattva great being by way of not apprehending anything is the highest, up to unrivaled.”
 Subhūti then asked, “Lord, what is that ‘highest rejoicing,’ up to ‘unrivaled rejoicing’ you talk about where you say, Lord, ‘A son of a good family or daughter of a good family compresses all together the mass of merit from that rejoicing, up to dedication of all their wholesome roots and collects them into one and rejoices with the highest rejoicing, up to the unrivaled rejoicing’?”
 The Lord replied, “It is when that son of a good family or daughter of a good family, without grasping, without rejecting, without falsely projecting, without acquiring, and without apprehending those wholesome roots of past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas together with their śrāvaka saṅghas, those wholesome roots of their pratyekabuddhas, and of all other beings, thinks, ‘Here there is no production, no cessation, no defilement, no purification of a dharma; those dharmas do not decrease, do not increase, do not come, do not go, and do not turn into an aggregate, so on that account I rejoice just in the suchness, the unmistaken suchness, the unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, and the certification of dharmas  of those past, future, and present dharmas and, having rejoiced, dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ The rejoicing by bodhisattva great beings making such a dedication is the highest rejoicing, up to unrivaled rejoicing. All other rejoicing, Subhūti, does not approach it even by a hundredth part, up to does not stand up to any comparison to it. Compared with other rejoicing this rejoicing is the highest, up to unrivaled rejoicing.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family newly set out in the vehicle who wants to rejoice in all the wholesome roots of past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas together with their śrāvaka saṅghas and their pratyekabuddhas starting from when they first produced the thought, up to for as long as their good Dharma lasts (in these are the wholesome roots endowed with the perfection of giving and endowed with the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom, up to immeasurable other buddhadharmas) and the wholesome roots of all other beings, should rejoice like this: ‘As liberation is, so too is giving; as liberation is, so too is morality, patience, perseverance, and concentration; and as liberation is, so too is wisdom. As liberation is, so too are form, feeling, perception, and volitional factors, and so too is consciousness. As liberation is, so too is inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. As liberation is, so too are the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening. As liberation is, so too are the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. As liberation is, so too is the knowledge and seeing of liberation. As liberation is, so too is belief, so too is rejoicing. As liberation is, so too are the dharmas of past, future, and present buddhas; as liberation is, so too are the lord buddhas; as liberation is, so too is the complete awakening of those lord buddhas; and as liberation is, so too is the complete nirvāṇa of those lord buddhas. As liberation is, so too are the śrāvakas, so too the pratyekabuddhas of those lord buddhas, and so too is the nirvāṇa of those śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. As liberation is, so too is the true dharmic nature of those lord buddhas. As liberation is, so too is the true dharmic nature of those śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. As liberation is, so too is the suchness of all dharmas.’ They should rejoice like that. And, because nothing has changed places and nothing has been destroyed, so too is the true dharmic nature of dharmas that are not bound, are not freed, are not defiled, and are not purified; so to is the true dharmic nature of dharmas that are not produced, do not appear, and do not stop.  If the dedication to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is like that, Subhūti, it is the highest rejoicing of bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings endowed with such rejoicing quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, some son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has set out in the Great Vehicle, for as long as they live, may respect, revere, honor, and worship with all the requirements for happiness and with the requirements (robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses) those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas with their śrāvaka saṅghas—the lord buddhas presently dwelling and maintaining themselves with their śrāvaka saṅghas in world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each direction in the ten directions. They may produce an enthusiasm for respecting, revering, honoring, and worshiping those lord buddhas who have passed into complete nirvāṇa, with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. They may stand in morality, cultivate patience, exert themselves at perseverance, be absorbed in concentration, and cultivate wisdom, but cultivating by way of apprehending something. And another son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, practicing the perfection of giving and practicing the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom may dedicate those wholesome roots  to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening by way of not apprehending anything. That earlier accumulation of merit does not approach even by a hundredth part, up to does not stand up to any comparison with that accumulation of merit. That dedication is the highest, up to unrivaled.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving and practicing the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom with skillful means should dedicate those wholesome roots like this by way of not apprehending anything.” 
This was the thirty-third chapter, “Dedication,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 34: Perfect Praise of the Quality of Accomplishment
Then venerable Śāriputra said to the Lord, “Lord, the perfection of wisdom makes things clear because of absolute purity. Lord, the perfection of wisdom makes you want to bow. Lord, I bow to the perfection of wisdom. Lord, the perfection of wisdom is untainted by all three realms. Lord, the perfection of wisdom corrects visual distortions because of having eliminated all the darkness of afflictive emotion and views. Lord, the perfection of wisdom works as the highest of the dharmas on the side of awakening. Lord, the perfection of wisdom provides security because it has eliminated all hazards, terrors, and persecution. Lord, the perfection of wisdom gives light because then all beings easily appropriate  the five eyes. Lord, the perfection of wisdom shows the ruts because beings caught in the ruts avoid the two edges. Lord, the perfection of wisdom works as the knowledge of all aspects because of having eliminated all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions. Lord, the perfection of wisdom is the mother of great bodhisattvas because she gives birth to all the buddhadharmas. Lord, the perfection of wisdom is unproduced and unceasing because of being empty of its own mark. Lord, the perfection of wisdom counteracts saṃsāra because it is not unmoved and not destroyed. Lord, the perfection of wisdom works as the protector of all unprotected beings because it is the giver of all precious dharmas. Lord, the perfection of wisdom works as the ten powers because it deals with those who are untamed. Lord, the perfection of wisdom works as repeating and thus turning the wheel of the Dharma that has twelve aspects three times because it does not go forward and does not turn back. Lord, the perfection of wisdom works to show the intrinsic nature of all dharmas because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Since this is the case, Lord, how does one stand in the perfection of wisdom?”
 The Lord said, “Śāriputra, you should stand with the perfection of wisdom just as you stand with the Teacher. You should bow to the perfection of wisdom just as you bow to the Teacher. And why? Because this perfection of wisdom is not one thing and the Teacher another; the Teacher is not one thing and the perfection of wisdom another. The perfection of wisdom is itself the Teacher  and the Teacher is himself the perfection of wisdom, because even the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas are a category because of the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, worthy ones, non-returners, once-returners, and stream enterers are also categories because of it. The ten wholesome actions are categories because of it. The four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions are categories because of it. The five clairvoyances, the five perfections, inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are categories because of it, up to the knowledge of all aspects is a category because of it.”
 Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods to think, “What occasioned this inquiry by the venerable monk Śāriputra? What was the catalyst?” 
 Then venerable Śāriputra, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, it occurred to you to think, ‘What occasioned this inquiry by the venerable monk Śāriputra? What was the catalyst?’ In regard to that, I made the inquiry with the thought that bodhisattva great beings assisted by the perfection of wisdom with skillful means dedicate those wholesome roots of the past, future, and present lord buddhas, as many as there are, starting from when they first produced the thought, up to for as long as their good Dharma lasts, to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Kauśika,  this perfection of wisdom of the bodhisattva great beings surpasses the perfection of giving, and similarly, it surpasses the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, and concentration. 
 “To illustrate, without a guide a hundred, a thousand, or one hundred thousand with congenital blindness cannot even find the road, so how could they ever make it to the city? Similarly, Kauśika, without the perfection of wisdom as a guide these five perfections, like those with congenital blindness, cannot even find the path to awakening, so how could they ever make it to the city of the knowledge of all aspects? Kauśika, when the five perfections are assisted by the perfection of wisdom, then they too have eyes and get the name perfection.” 
 Śatakratu then inquired, “Venerable monk Śāriputra, you have said, ‘When the five perfections are assisted by the perfection of wisdom then they too have eyes and get the name perfection.’ So then, venerable monk Śāriputra, when the five perfections are assisted by the perfection of giving, do they not get the name perfection? Similarly, when the five perfections are assisted by the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, and concentration, do those five perfections not get the name perfection either?”
 “It is not so, Kauśika, it is not so,” replied Śāriputra. “When the five perfections are assisted by the perfection of giving, they do not get the name perfection. Similarly, when the five perfections are assisted by the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, and concentration, those five perfections do not get the name perfection either. Therefore, Kauśika, the perfection of wisdom  is the highest, the most excellent, foremost, the best, the most superb, sublime, and unsurpassed, and it is unrivaled by the five perfections.” 
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked the Lord, “Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom?”
 The Lord replied, “Śāriputra, they should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves form; they should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Similarly, they should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves constituents, sense fields, dependent originations, or the perfection of giving; they should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, or concentration. They should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. They should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening. They should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or distinct attributes of a buddha. They should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, they should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves any of those dharmas.”
 Śāriputra then asked,  “Lord, how do they find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so that they do not find and produce within themselves form? Lord, how do they find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so they do not find and produce within themselves . . . up to all dharmas?”
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “they should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom as the nonenactment, the nonproduction, the noncessation, the nonappearance, the nondestruction, and the nonapprehension of form.”
 “Lord, does finding and producing within themselves the perfection of wisdom like that cause any dharma to be gained?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “finding and producing within themselves the perfection of wisdom like that does not cause any dharma to be gained, and it is because it does not cause any dharma to be gained that it is counted the perfection of wisdom.”
 “Lord, what dharmas does it not cause to be gained?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “it does not cause wholesome dharmas to be gained, it does not cause unwholesome dharmas to be gained, and similarly it does not cause dharmas that are basic immorality or what is not basic immorality, compounded or uncompounded, afflicted or unafflicted, ordinary or extraordinary, or defilement or purification to be gained. It does not cause the dharmas of saṃsāra to be gained, and it does not cause the dharmas of nirvāṇa to be gained. And why?  Because the perfection of wisdom does not make any dharma available by way of apprehending it. Therefore, it does not cause it to be gained.” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked the Lord, “Does this perfection of wisdom also not cause the knowledge of all aspects to be gained?”
 The Lord said, “In regard to what you, Kauśika, have said—‘Does this perfection of wisdom also not cause the knowledge of all aspects to be gained?’—exactly so! Exactly so! The perfection of wisdom does not cause any dharma to be gained. It does not cause any to be apprehended and therefore does not cause even the knowledge of all aspects to be gained. It does not apprehend it.”
 “Lord, why does this perfection of wisdom not cause the knowledge of all aspects to be gained? Why does it not apprehend it?” asked Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” replied the Lord, “it is because the perfection of wisdom does not cause it to be gained as a name, as a causal sign, or as something to be enacted.”
 “Well then, Lord, how does this perfection of wisdom cause it to be gained?” asked Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” replied the Lord, “it is because the perfection of wisdom causes it to be gained without apprehending, without asserting, without being stationed on, without forsaking, without settling down on, without grasping, and without rejecting anything at all, but it does not cause any dharma to be gained.”
 Śatakratu said, “It is amazing, Lord, how this perfection of wisdom has been made available in order to make the nonproduction, noncessation, nonenactment, nonapprehension, nonpurification, and nondestruction of all  dharmas easy.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom have such ideas as ‘the perfection of wisdom causes all dharmas to be gained’ or ‘the perfection of wisdom does not cause all dharmas to be gained,’ then, Lord, the perfection of wisdom is forsaken, and this causes distance from the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord replied, “There is a way in which bodhisattva great beings forsake the perfection of wisdom, a way that causes distance from the perfection of wisdom. When bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom have such ideas as ‘This perfection of wisdom rings hollow. This perfection of wisdom is in vain. This perfection of wisdom is pointless. This perfection of wisdom is a fraud,’ that makes those bodhisattva great beings forsake the perfection of wisdom. It causes those bodhisattva great beings to be distant from the perfection of wisdom.”
“The Lord is confident about the perfection of wisdom. In what dharmas do you not have confidence?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “being confident about the perfection of wisdom, I do not have confidence in form, and I do not have confidence in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; I do not have confidence in eyes, and I do not have confidence in ears, nose, tongue, body, or thinking mind; I do not have confidence in a form, and I do not have confidence in a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, or dharmas; I do not have confidence in the perfection of giving,  and I do not have confidence in the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom; I do not have confidence in inner emptiness, up to and I do not have confidence in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. I do not have confidence in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening. I do not have confidence in the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; I do not have confidence in the result of stream enterer, and I do not have confidence in the result of once-returneror the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, the state of a pratyekabuddha, or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Being confident about the perfection of wisdom, I do not have confidence in the knowledge of all aspects.” 
“Lord, why, being confident about the perfection of wisdom, do you not have confidence in form, and why do you not have confidence in . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects?” asked Subhūti.
The Lord said, “Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives me confidence because form cannot be apprehended. The perfection of wisdom gives me confidence because . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects cannot be apprehended. Therefore, Subhūti, being confident about the perfection of wisdom, I do not have confidence in form, and I do not have confidence in . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Lord, this—namely, the perfection of wisdom—is a huge perfection,” said Subhūti.
“What do you think, Subhūti?” asked the Lord. “In what way is this perfection of wisdom a huge perfection?” 
Subhūti replied, “Lord, the perfection of wisdom does not make form bigger, nor does it make it smaller;  it does not make feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness bigger, nor does it make them smaller; similarly, it does not make the constituents, sense fields, or dependent originations bigger nor does it make them smaller. It does not make the perfection of giving bigger, nor does it make it smaller; similarly, it does not make the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, or concentration bigger, nor does it make them smaller; it does not make inner emptiness bigger, nor does it make it smaller; it does not make . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature bigger, nor does it make it smaller; it does not make the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening bigger, nor does it make them smaller; it does not make the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or distinct attributes of a buddha bigger, nor does it make them smaller; it does not make awakening bigger, nor does it make it smaller; and it does not make an awakened one bigger, nor does it make an awakened one smaller.
“It does not compress form, nor does it expand it; it does not compress feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, nor does it expand them; up to it does not compress awakening or an awakened one, nor does it expand them. 
“It does not make form measurable, nor does it make it immeasurable; it does not make feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness measurable, nor does it does not make them immeasurable; up to it does not make awakening or an awakened one measurable, nor does it make them immeasurable.
“It does not free up form, nor does it enclose it; it does not free up feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, nor does it enclose them; up to it does not free up awakening or an awakened one, nor does it enclose them.
“It does not strengthen form, nor does it weaken it;  it does not strengthen feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, nor does it weaken them; up to it does not strengthen awakening or an awakened one, nor does it weaken them.
“In this way, Lord, this perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings is a huge perfection.
“Lord, when bodhisattva great beings newly set out in the vehicle, having resorted to the perfection of wisdom and resorted to the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving, have the notion, ‘It does not make form bigger nor, does it make it smaller,’ up to ‘It does not make an awakened one bigger, nor does it make an awakened one smaller,’ up to ‘It does not strengthen, nor does it weaken form,’ those bodhisattva great beings with such notions, Lord, are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because making form bigger or smaller, up to making an awakened one bigger or smaller is not in harmony with the perfection of wisdom as cause; strengthening or weakening form, up to and strengthening or weakening an awakened one is not in harmony with the perfection of wisdom as cause. 
“And why? Because there is no awakening for those with a notion that something is being apprehended. 
“Thus, you should know that the nonproduction of the perfection of wisdom is because beings are not produced. Similarly, you should know that the nonproduction of the perfection of wisdom  is because form is not produced, up to you should know that the nonproduction of the perfection of wisdom is because a buddha is not produced.
“You should know that the perfection of wisdom has no intrinsic nature because beings have no intrinsic nature. You should know that the perfection of wisdom has no intrinsic nature because form has no intrinsic nature, up to you should know that the perfection of wisdom has no intrinsic nature because a buddha has no intrinsic nature.
“You should know that the perfection of wisdom is not an existing thing because a being is not an existing thing. Similarly, you should know that the perfection of wisdom is not an existing thing because form is not an existing thing. You should know that the perfection of wisdom is not an existing thing because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not existing things, up to you should know that the perfection of wisdom is not an existing thing because a buddha is not an existing thing.
“You should know that the perfection of wisdom is empty because beings are empty. Similarly, you should know that the perfection of wisdom is empty because form is empty. You should know that the perfection of wisdom is empty because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are empty, up to you should know that the perfection of wisdom is empty because a buddha is empty.
“Similarly, you should know that the perfection of wisdom is signless and wishless because beings are signless and wishless. Similarly, you should know that the perfection of wisdom is signless and wishless because form is signless and wishless. You should know that the perfection of wisdom is signless and wishless because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are signless and wishless, up to you should know that the perfection of wisdom is signless and wishless because a buddha is signless and wishless.
“Similarly, you should know the isolation and nonexistence of the perfection of wisdom because of the isolation and nonexistence of beings. 
“Similarly, you should know the inconceivability of the perfection of wisdom because of the inconceivability of beings. 
“You should know the nondestruction of the perfection of wisdom because of the nondestruction of beings. 
“You should know that there is no full awakening of the perfection of wisdom because there is no full awakening of beings. You should know that there is no full awakening of the perfection of wisdom because there is no full awakening of form. You should know that there is no full awakening of the perfection of wisdom because there is no full awakening of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, up to you should know that there is no full awakening of the perfection of wisdom because there is no full awakening of a buddha.
“You should know that the perfection of wisdom is not endowed with the powers because beings are not endowed with the powers. You should know that the perfection of wisdom is not endowed with the powers because form is not endowed with the powers. You should know that the perfection of wisdom is not endowed with the powers because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not endowed with the powers, up to you should know that the perfection of wisdom is not endowed with the powers because a buddha is not endowed with the powers.
“In this way too, Lord, this perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings is a huge perfection.”
This was the thirty-fourth chapter, “Perfect Praise of the Quality of Accomplishment,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 35: Hells
Then venerable Śāriputra inquired of the Lord, “Where did they die, Lord, bodhisattva great beings who have come here and believe in this perfection of wisdom? How long has it been since a son of a good family or daughter of a good family believing in this perfection of wisdom as the meaning and method set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? On how many tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have they attended? For how long have they been practitioners of the perfection of giving? For how long have they been practitioners of the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, and concentration? For how long have they been practitioners of the perfection of wisdom?” 
Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, those bodhisattva great beings have come here and have been reborn here after attending on tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in the ten directions. Śāriputra, it has been an infinite, countless hundred thousand one hundred million billion eons since those bodhisattva great beings set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. After their first production of the thought, from then on they practiced the perfection of giving, practiced  the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom, and took rebirth here; from then on they attended on infinite, countless, immeasurable, inconceivable, imponderable tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas and came here. Śāriputra, if those bodhisattva great beings even see or hear the perfection of wisdom, the thought arises, ‘I am beholding the Teacher,’ and the thought arises, ‘I am hearing the Teacher.’ Śāriputra, those bodhisattva great beings, by way of no causal signs, nonduality, and not apprehending anything, comprehend this perfection of wisdom as the meaning and method.”
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, can you view or listen to the perfection of wisdom?” 
“No, Subhūti,” the Lord replied. “Subhūti, because dharmas are in an inanimate material state there is no viewer of, or listener to, the perfection of wisdom, so they do not see or hear the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, because dharmas are in an inanimate material state they do not see or hear the perfection of concentration, perseverance, patience, morality, or giving; because dharmas are in an inanimate material state they do not see or hear inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; and similarly, because dharmas are in an inanimate material state they do not see or hear the applications of mindfulness; because dharmas are in an inanimate material state they do not see or hear the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or paths; because dharmas are in an inanimate material state they do not see or hear the ten tathāgata powers, four  fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and because dharmas are in an inanimate material state they do not see or hear awakening, and do not see and hear an awakened one.” 
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, for how long have those bodhisattva great beings who do the yogic practice of this deep perfection of wisdom here been practicing?” 
The Lord said, “To pronounce on this you have to go into detail. Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings who, after their first production of the thought, from then on do the yogic practice of this deep perfection of wisdom and similarly do the yogic practice of the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving—doing it, furthermore, with skillful means, without any dharma at all, and without seeing how there is increase or decrease—then they will never be separated from the six perfections and never be separated from the lord buddhas. With whatever special offerings they want to respect, revere, honor, and worship the lord buddhas, immediately after their first production of the thought they obtain them and pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield. They are never born in a mother’s womb, they are never separated from the clairvoyant knowledges, they never entertain any afflictive emotion, they never entertain a śrāvaka thought or pratyekabuddha thought, and they also bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield, and pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield.  Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings do the yogic practice of this deep perfection of wisdom.
“Subhūti, there are those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who have seen many hundreds of buddhas, many thousands of buddhas, many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion buddhas. When they were disciples in their presence, they gave gifts and cultivated morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom by way of apprehending something. They leave the retinue when this deep perfection of wisdom is being taught. Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family do not respect this deep perfection of wisdom when it is being taught, and they walk out on those lord buddhas.
“Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle are gathered right here. They are those who leave when this deep perfection of wisdom is being taught. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings walked out in the past when this deep perfection of wisdom was being taught, so they walk out again now when this deep perfection of wisdom is being taught. They are not collected in body and mind, so they amass the karma of those who act out of intellectual confusion. Those who have made and amassed that karma of the intellectually confused, on account of that, reject this deep perfection of wisdom when it is being taught, and because of rejecting this deep perfection of wisdom they reject the knowledge of all aspects of past, future, and present lord buddhas as well. Those who have made an enactment of, and amassed the karma that comes from, rejecting the knowledge of all aspects and those who have made  and amassed the karma that leads to the loss of the Dharma roast in the hells for many hundred years, many thousand years, many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion years. They pass on from great hells to great hells, and as they are passing on from great hells to great hells the destruction by fire, destruction by water, and destruction by wind come about. When the destruction is happening there, they are hurled into those great hells in other world systems. After they are born there they again pass on from great hells to great hells, and as they are passing on from great hells to great hells again the destructions happen and they are hurled from those world systems into yet other world systems. When the destructions come about in those as well, they are again hurled into the eastern direction and hurled into the great hells in the south, west, and north, the intermediate directions, and below and above. And when the destructions also happen in those world systems, they are again hurled into the great hells in other world systems. But even when the destructions happen in those world systems, still the karma for being deprived of the Dharma is not exhausted, so after they have died in those world systems they again take rebirth right here and again pass on from the great hells to the great hells. And when they are born in those great hells they experience the sufferings of hell, and their experience of the sufferings of hell continues until  the destructions again happen. But even after the destructions happen, they die here and are again reborn in the great hells in other world systems. Similarly, they are born over and over again in the animal worlds in all the ten directions, and they are born over and over again in the worlds of Yama in all the ten directions. 
“Born there, the experience of those feelings of suffering uses up the karma. When their experience of those many sufferings has used up the karma and they somehow or other gain a human rebirth, still, just because of amassing that karma that leads to the loss of the Dharma, wherever they are born they are born congenitally blind in congenitally blind families, in outcast families, in families of garbage workers, and in low-class families. And when they are born, they are born such that they also become blind, or blind in one eye, or without a tongue, or without arms, or without legs, or without ears, or without a nose, or where the word Buddha is never heard, the word Dharma and the word Saṅgha are never heard, and the words bodhisattva and pratyekabuddha are never heard.”
Then venerable Śāriputra said to the Lord, “Lord, committing and amassing the five inexpiable sins does not rank with the karma that leads to the loss of the Dharma.”
“Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “when the perfection of wisdom is being taught there are those who think they have to put a stop to it and say, ‘This is not the Dharma, this is not the Vinaya, these are not the Teacher’s words; tathāgatas, worthy ones,  perfectly complete buddhas did not say, do not say, and will not say this, so you should not train in it.’ They think, ‘I too have to oppose this,’ and they cause other beings to separate from it. Having harmed their own mental continuums, they plot harm to the mental continuums of others; having poisoned their own mental continuums they poison the mental continuums of others; having ruined their own mental continuums, they want to ruin the mental continuums of others, and they think, ‘Since even I do not comprehend or understand the deep perfection of wisdom, I will put a stop to it,’ and they cause others to take it like that as well. Since this is the case you have to say, ‘Those who have committed the five inexpiable sins do not rank with those who have done and amassed the karma that leads to the loss of the Dharma.’ Śāriputra, I do not let such persons hear it, let alone look at it. How could that ever possibly be? And why? Śāriputra, you should know that it is because such persons spoil the Dharma; such persons are like rotten trees and have a wicked nature. Śāriputra, those are the sort of persons who think they should have faith and listen but who do it in a wrong way, so calamity befalls them. 
“Śāriputra, you should know that those persons who spoil my perfection of wisdom are those who spoil the Dharma.”
Śāriputra said, “Lord, the Lord has not yet explained the extent of the physical horrors for a person born there who spoils the Dharma.”
“Śāriputra,” said the Lord, “leave aside the extent of the physical horrors for that person born there who spoils the Dharma. And why? Because the consequences from hearing about the extent of the physical horrors for the person who spoils the Dharma are as bad as those physical horrors encountered by that person who spoils the Dharma, as much as that—  vomiting warm blood from the mouth, or dying, or experiencing pain enough to die, or on hearing it being impaled on a shaft of pain, or drying out and shriveling into oneself like a severed blue green naḍa reed.” 
So the Lord did not make a space for venerable Śāriputra to know just how great an extent the physical horror there would be.
Śāriputra said, “Lord, please explain so later generations will be given a glimpse of the fact that persons who spoil the Dharma will appropriate physical horrors like that on account of having done and amassed karma that leads to the loss of the Dharma.”
“Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “later generations, just from this, will also glimpse the fact that ‘on account of having completely done and amassed karma that leads to the loss of the Dharma, they will experience suffering in the hells lasting that long, they will experience the immeasurability of that suffering—the amount of it and its duration—for that amount of time.’ ”
“Lord, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have a bright nature will, just from this, turn back from those actions that lead to the loss of the Dharma. And we too, thinking ‘we will meet with such sufferings as those,’ will not reject the good Dharma even at the cost of our lives,” said Śāriputra.
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Those who have made and amassed speech karma that rejects the good Dharma make and amass karma that leads to the loss of the Dharma, so we sons of good family or daughters of good family will restrain well our actions of body, speech, and mind lest we meet with such suffering as that, or lest we not see the tathāgatas, or not hear the Dharma, or not provide service to the saṅgha, or be born in buddhafields where there are  no buddhas, or be born as paupers, or become those whose words are not accepted.”
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “those ignorant persons gone forth to homelessness in the well-spoken Dharma and Vinaya thinking they have to strongly object to this perfection of wisdom, through the karma they have made and amassed, make and amass karma that leads to the loss of the Dharma. Subhūti, strongly objecting and putting a stop to the perfection of wisdom is strongly objecting and putting a stop to the awakening of the lord buddhas; strongly objecting and putting a stop to the awakening of the lord buddhas is strongly objecting and putting a stop to the knowledge of all aspects of past, future, and present lord buddhas; strongly objecting and putting a stop to the knowledge of all aspects is strongly objecting and putting a stop to the Dharma; putting a stop to the Dharma is putting a stop to the Saṅgha; putting a stop to the Saṅgha is putting a stop to ordinary right view and extraordinary right view, and similarly putting a stop to the six perfections, thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, up to the knowledge of all aspects. Those who put a stop to the knowledge of all aspects get saddled with an unbounded, infinite, incalculable mass of demerit, and those who are saddled with a mass of demerit get saddled with unbounded, infinite, incalculable suffering and mental anguish.”
“Lord, what different things  dispose those ignorant persons who put a stop to this deep perfection of wisdom to put a stop to this deep perfection of wisdom?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “four things dispose them to put a stop to this deep perfection of wisdom. What four things? Those ignorant persons are these, namely, they are possessed by Māra, they do not believe in and do not find faith in the deep Dharma, they fall into the clutches of bad friends, so they settle down on the five aggregates, and while those ignorant persons are doing wrong they praise themselves and disparage others. Subhūti, ignorant persons beset by these four things put a stop to this deep perfection of wisdom.”
Subhūti said, “Lord, it is hard for those who do not work hard, who are without wholesome roots, and who have fallen into the clutches of bad friends to believe in this perfection of wisdom.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so,” said the Lord. “It is hard for those who do not work hard, who are without wholesome roots, and who have fallen into the clutches of bad friends to believe in this perfection of wisdom.”
Subhūti then asked, “Just how deep, Lord, is this perfection of wisdom in which it is so hard for them to believe?”
“Subhūti,” said the Lord, “form is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in form is form. Similarly, Subhūti, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in consciousness is consciousness.
“Subhūti, the perfection of giving  is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the perfection of giving is the perfection of giving. Similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of morality . . . the perfection of patience . . . the perfection of perseverance . . . the perfection of concentration . . . and the perfection of wisdom is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the perfection of wisdom is the perfection of wisdom. 
“Subhūti, inner emptiness is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in inner emptiness is inner emptiness, up to Subhūti, the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. 
“Subhūti, the applications of mindfulness are not bound and they are not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the applications of mindfulness is the applications of mindfulness. Similarly, Subhūti, the right efforts . . . the legs of miraculous power . . . the faculties . . . the powers . . . the limbs of awakening . . . and the path is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the path is the path.
“Similarly, Subhūti, the ten tathāgata powers . . . the four fearlessnesses . . . the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha . . . and the knowledge of all aspects is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the knowledge of all aspects is the knowledge of all aspects.
“Subhūti, the prior limit of form is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the prior limit is form.  Similarly, Subhūti, the prior limit of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the prior limit is the knowledge of all aspects.
“Subhūti, the later limit of form is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the later limit is form. Similarly, Subhūti, the later limit of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the later limit is the knowledge of all aspects.
“Subhūti, present form is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the present is form. Similarly, Subhūti, present feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness, up to knowledge of all aspects is not bound and is not freed. And why? Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the present is the knowledge of all aspects.”
Subhūti said, “Lord, it is hard for those who do not work hard, have not planted wholesome roots, have fallen into the clutches of bad friends, are under the control of Māra, and are lazy, deficient in perseverance, forgetful, and without introspection to believe in this perfection of wisdom.”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so,” replied the Lord. “Subhūti, it is hard for those who do not work hard, up to are without introspection to believe in this perfection of wisdom. 
“Subhūti, that purity of form is just the purity of the result. That purity of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is just the purity of the result, up to that purity of the knowledge of all aspects is just the purity of the result.” 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, that purity of form is the purity of the result. That purity of the result is the purity of the perfection of wisdom. That purity of the perfection of wisdom is the purity of form. That purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is the purity of the result. That purity of the result is the purity of the perfection of wisdom. That purity of the perfection of wisdom is the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, all of these—purity of form, purity of the result, purity of the perfection of wisdom, and purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects—are not two, are not divided, are not broken apart, and are not cut apart.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, that purity of form is the purity of the perfection of wisdom. That purity of the perfection of wisdom is the purity of form. That purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is the purity of the perfection of wisdom. That purity of the perfection of wisdom is the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of form,  purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects, and purity of the perfection of wisdom are not two, are not divided, are not broken apart, and are not cut apart. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, that purity of self is the purity of form. That purity of form is the purity of self. Thus, this purity of self and purity of form are not two, are not divided, are not broken apart, and are not cut apart. This purity of a being, a living being, up to one who knows, and one who sees, and the purity of form, and the purity of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, up to the knowledge of all aspects are not two, are not divided, are not broken apart, and are not cut apart. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, because of the purity of greed there is the purity of form, the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of greed, purity of form, purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart. Similarly, because of the purity of hatred and confusion there is the purity of form, the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of hatred and confusion, purity of form, purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, because of the purity of greed, hatred, and confusion there is the purity of form, the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus this purity of greed, hatred, and confusion, the purity of form,  this purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, because of the purity of ignorance there is the purity of volitional factors; because of the purity of volitional factors there is the purity of consciousness, and similarly, there is the purity of name and form, purity of the six sense fields, purity of contact, purity of feeling, purity of craving, purity of appropriation, purity of existence, purity of birth, and purity of old age and death.
“Because of the purity of old age and death there is the purity of the perfection of giving; because of the purity of the perfection of giving there is the purity of the perfection of morality; because of the purity of the perfection of morality there is the purity of the perfection of patience; because of the purity of the perfection of patience there is the purity of the perfection of perseverance; because of the purity of the perfection of perseverance there is the purity of the perfection of concentration; because of the purity of the perfection of concentration there is the purity of the perfection of wisdom; because of the purity of the perfection of wisdom there is the purity of inner emptiness; because of the purity of inner emptiness there is the purity of . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; and because of the purity of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature there is the purity of the applications of mindfulness. Similarly, there is the purity of the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path; because of the purity of the path there is the purity of all-knowledge; because of the purity of all-knowledge there is the purity of the ten powers; because of the purity of the ten powers there is the purity of the fearlessnesses; because of the purity  of the fearlessnesses there is the purity of the detailed and thorough knowledges; because of the purity of the detailed and thorough knowledges there is the purity of the distinct attributes of a buddha; and because of the purity of the distinct attributes of a buddha there is the purity of the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of the knowledge of all aspects and purity of the distinct attributes of a buddha is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, that purity of the perfection of wisdom is the purity of form. That purity of form is the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of the perfection of wisdom, purity of form, purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart. 
“Similarly, that purity of the perfection of concentration, purity of the perfection of perseverance, purity of the perfection of patience, purity of the perfection of morality, and purity of the perfection of giving is the purity of form. That purity of form is the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of the perfection of giving, purity of form, purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart. Because of the purity of inner emptiness, up to the purity of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature there is the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects; because of the purity of the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening there is the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects; because of the purity of the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha there is the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of the aggregates, the constituents, the sense fields, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha,  and the purity of the knowledge of all aspects is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, because of the purity of the compounded there is the purity of the uncompounded; because of the purity of the uncompounded there is the purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of the compounded, purity of the uncompounded, and purity of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, because of the purity of the past there is the purity of the future; because of the purity of the future there is the purity of the past; because of the purity of the present there is purity of the past and future; and because of the purity of the past and future there is purity of the present. Thus, this purity of the past, purity of the future, and purity of the present is not two, is not divided, is not broken apart, and is not cut apart.” 
This was the thirty-fifth chapter, “Hells,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 36: Teaching the Purity of All Dharmas
Then venerable Śāriputra said to the Lord, “Lord, this purity is deep.”
“It is deep, Śāriputra, because it is extremely pure,” said the Lord.
“On account of what being extremely pure is it deep?” asked Śāriputra.
“Śāriputra,” replied the Lord,  “it is deep because form is extremely pure. It is deep because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are extremely pure. It is deep because the earth element, water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element are extremely pure. It is deep because the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are extremely pure. It is deep because a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas are extremely pure. It is deep because the perfection of giving is extremely pure. It is deep because the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom are extremely pure. It is deep because inner emptiness is extremely pure, up to it is deep because the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is extremely pure. It is deep because the applications of mindfulness are extremely pure. It is deep because the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path are extremely pure. It is deep because the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha are extremely pure. It is deep because awakening is extremely pure, up to the knowledge of all aspects is extremely pure.” 
“Lord, purity is light,” said Śāriputra.
“Purity is light, Śāriputra, because it is extremely pure,” said the Lord.
“Lord, on account of what being extremely pure is it light?” asked Śāriputra.
“Śāriputra,” replied the Lord,  “purity is light because form is extremely pure. Purity is light because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are extremely pure. Purity is light because the eyes are extremely pure. Purity is light because the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind are extremely pure. Purity is light because a form, a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas are extremely pure. Purity is light because the earth element, water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element are extremely pure. Purity is light because the perfection of giving is extremely pure. Purity is light because the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom are extremely pure. Purity is light because inner emptiness is extremely pure, up to purity is light because the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is extremely pure. Purity is light because the applications of mindfulness are extremely pure. Purity is light because the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path are extremely pure. Purity is light because the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are extremely pure, up to purity is light because the knowledge of all aspects is extremely pure.” 
“Lord, purity does not link up,” said Śāriputra.
“That is because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, on account of what not linking up is it pure?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord,  “form does not link up because it does not change places, so it is pure, up to the knowledge of all aspects does not link up because it does not change places, so it is pure.”
“Lord, purity is without defilement,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, on account what not being defiled is it pure?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “because form is naturally without defilement it is pure, up to because the knowledge of all aspects is naturally without defilement it is pure.”
“Lord, there is no obtaining and no clear realization of purity,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, on account of not obtaining and not clearly realizing what is it pure?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “because of not obtaining and not clearly realizing form it is pure, up to because of not obtaining and not clearly realizing the knowledge of all aspects it is pure.”
“Lord, purity does not come into being,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, on account of what  not coming into being is it pure?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “because form does not come into being it is pure, up to because the knowledge of all aspects does not come into being it is pure.”
“Lord, purity does not arise in the desire realm,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why does purity not arise in the desire realm?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “purity does not arise because you cannot apprehend the desire realm’s intrinsic nature.”
“Lord, purity does not arise in the form realm,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why does purity not arise in the form realm?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “purity does not arise because you cannot apprehend the form realm’s intrinsic nature.”
“Lord, purity does not arise in the formless realm,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why does purity not arise in the formless realm?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “purity does not arise because you cannot apprehend the formless realm’s intrinsic nature.”
“Lord, purity does not know,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why does purity not know?”  asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “purity does not know because dharmas are inanimate material.” 
“Lord, purity does not know form,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why does purity not know form?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “purity does not know form because it is empty of its own mark.” 
“Lord, purity does not know feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
 “Lord, why does purity not know feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “purity does not know feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness because it is empty of its own mark.” 
“Lord, purity does not know all dharmas,” said Śāriputra.
“Because they are extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why does purity not know all dharmas?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “purity does not know all dharmas because all dharmas cannot be found.” 
“Lord, the perfection of wisdom does not help, nor does it hinder, the knowledge of all aspects,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,”  said the Lord.
“Lord, why does the perfection of wisdom not help or hinder the knowledge of all aspects?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom does not help or hinder the knowledge of all aspects because of the establishment of the dharma-constituent.”
“Lord, the purity that is the perfection of wisdom does not assist any dharma,” said Śāriputra.
“Because it is extremely pure, Śāriputra,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why does the perfection of wisdom not assist any dharma?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Because the dharma-constituent is without movement,” said the Lord.
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, form is pure because self is pure.”
“Because it is extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why is form extremely pure because self is pure?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “because of the nonexistence of self the nonexistence of form is extremely pure.”
“Lord, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are pure because self is pure,” said Subhūti.
“Because they are extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why are feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness extremely pure because self is pure?” asked Subhūti. 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “because of the nonexistence of self the nonexistence of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is extremely pure.”
“Lord,” said Subhūti, “the perfection of giving is pure because self is pure. Similarly, the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom are pure because self is pure; the applications of mindfulness are pure because self is pure; the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path are pure because self is pure. Lord, because self is pure the ten tathāgata powers are pure, and similarly, Lord, the fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha are pure.” 
“Because they are extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why are all the buddhadharmas extremely pure because self is pure?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti, because of the nonexistence of self the nonexistence of all the buddhadharmas is extremely pure,” said the Lord.
“Lord, the result of stream enterer is pure because self is pure. Similarly, Lord, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening are pure because self is pure,” said Subhūti.
 “Because they are empty of their own mark, Subhūti,”  said the Lord.
“Lord, why is the result of stream enterer pure because self is pure? Why are the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening pure because self is pure?” asked Subhūti.
“Because they are extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, awakening is pure because self is pure,” said Subhūti.
“Because it is extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why is awakening pure because self is pure?” asked Subhūti.
“Because it is empty of its own mark, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, the knowledge of all aspects is pure because self is pure,” said Subhūti.
“Because it is extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why is the knowledge of all aspects pure because self is pure?” asked Subhūti.
“Because knowledge is not found and is not discarded, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, there is no obtaining and no clear realization of nonduality and purity,” said Subhūti.
“Because they are extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why is there is no obtaining and no clear realization of nonduality and purity?” asked Subhūti.
“Because there is no defilement and no purification, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, form is unlimited because self is unlimited,” said Subhūti. 
“Because it is extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why is form unlimited and pure because self is unlimited?” asked Subhūti.
“Because of the emptiness of what transcends limits and the emptiness of no beginning and no end, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are unlimited because self is unlimited,” said Subhūti.
“Because they are extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why are feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness unlimited and pure because self is unlimited?” asked Subhūti.
“Because of the emptiness of what transcends limits and the emptiness of no beginning and no end, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, such a realization as that is the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings,” said Subhūti.
“Because it is extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why is such a realization as that the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings?” asked Subhūti.
“Because it is the knowledge of path aspects, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, you cannot apprehend the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings  on this side, on the farther side, or on neither,” said Subhūti.
“Because it is extremely pure, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord, why can you not apprehend the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings on this side, on the farther side, or on neither?” asked Subhūti.
“Because of the sameness of the three time periods, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
“Lord,” said Subhūti, “if without skillful means a son of a good family or daughter of a good family in the Great Vehicle forms a notion of this perfection of wisdom by way of thus apprehending something, they will nullify the perfection of wisdom and distance themselves from the perfection of wisdom.”
“Excellent, Subhūti, excellent! Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “They are attached to a name and attached to a causal sign, Subhūti, even though all dharmas are without causal signs and without names.” 
“Lord, how are they attached to a name and attached to a causal sign?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here a son of a good family or daughter of a good family in the Great Vehicle seizes on this perfection of wisdom as a name, seizes on this perfection of wisdom as a causal sign, and, having seized on a name and causal sign, falsely projects a perfection of wisdom. Because they falsely project a perfection of wisdom they forsake and distance themselves from the perfection of wisdom.”
“Lord, such an excellent exposition and excellent definitive teaching of this perfection of wisdom and those who are attached and not attached to bodhisattva great beings is amazing,” said Subhūti.
Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, who are those bodhisattva great beings who are attached, and who are those who are not attached to the perfection of wisdom?”
“Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “here when sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle  without skillful means perceive that form is ‘empty,’ they are attached; when they perceive that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are ‘empty,’ they are attached, and similarly with the constituents, elements, and dependent origination too. When they perceive that the perfection of giving is ‘empty,’ they are attached, and similarly, when they perceive that the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom are ‘empty,’ they are attached. Similarly, when they perceive that the applications of mindfulness are ‘empty,’ they are attached, and similarly, when they perceive that the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, path, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, distinct attributes of a buddha, and knowledge of all aspects are ‘empty,’ they are attached. 
“Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, when sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle without skillful means perceive that past dharmas are ‘past dharmas,’ they are attached; when they perceive that future dharmas are ‘future,’ they are attached; and when they perceive present dharmas are ‘present,’ they are attached.
“Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, starting from the first production of the thought, when sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle without skillful means practice the perfection of giving by way of apprehending something, they are attached; when they practice the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom, they are attached; when they practice the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path,  they are attached; and when they practice the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, distinct attributes of a buddha, and knowledge of all aspects, they are attached. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, you have asked, ‘Who are those bodhisattva great beings not attached to practicing the perfection of wisdom?’ Venerable Śāriputra, it does not occur to bodhisattva great beings with skillful means practicing the perfection of wisdom to think like this: Form does not perceive form, feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness does not perceive consciousness; nor do past dharmas not perceive past dharmas, nor do future dharmas not perceive future dharmas, nor do present dharmas not perceive present dharmas. Venerable Śāriputra, because of inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, great emptiness, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of the compounded, the emptiness of the uncompounded, the emptiness of what transcends limits, the emptiness of no beginning and no end, the emptiness of nonrepudiation, the emptiness of a basic nature, the emptiness of all dharmas, the emptiness of its own mark, the emptiness of not apprehending, the emptiness of a nonexistent thing, the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, it does not occur to bodhisattva great beings with skillful means practicing the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘I am giving a gift; I am giving to them; I am giving this,’ and similarly, ‘I am cultivating morality . . . patience . . . perseverance . . . concentration . . . and wisdom, I am cultivating this wisdom,  I am cultivating wisdom like this’; ‘I am increasing merit, I am increasing this merit, I am increasing merit like this’; and ‘I am entering into the secure state of a bodhisattva, I am purifying a buddhafield, I am bringing beings to maturity, I am accomplishing the knowledge of all aspects.’ Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings with skillful means practicing the perfection of wisdom do not have such ideas. Venerable Śāriputra, those are the bodhisattva great beings who are not attached to practicing the perfection of wisdom.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, in what way do bodhisattva great beings become attached?” 
“Kauśika,” replied Subhūti, “here all that bodhisattvas perceive as the thought of awakening; all they perceive as giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom; all they perceive as inner emptiness, up to perceive as the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; all they perceive as the ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha; all they perceive as the lord buddhas; and all they perceive as the wholesome roots produced from the buddhas—all of that they compress together and collect into one, weigh, and dedicate to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That is the bodhisattva great beings’ attachment. On account of it they are not able to practice the perfection of wisdom that has no attachment. And why? Kauśika,  it is because the basic nature of form cannot be dedicated. Kauśika, it is because the basic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness cannot be dedicated, and similarly, up to it is because the basic nature of the knowledge of all aspects cannot be dedicated.
“Furthermore, Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings who want to teach and want to inspire others to take up unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should teach them, inspire them to take it up, motivate them, and excite them with a thinking mind that understands things as they really are and one way or another should teach so that when practicing the perfection of giving they do not have the idea, ‘I am giving a gift, I am guarding morality, I am being patient, I am making a vigorous effort, I am becoming absorbed in concentration, I am cultivating wisdom; I am practicing inner emptiness, up to I am practicing the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; I am cultivating the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; or I am practicing for the sake of awakening.’ Bodhisattva great beings who teach, inspire to take up, motivate, and excite others in that way do not destroy themselves, and they inspire others with the inspiration to take it up endorsed by the buddhas. Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings should teach others, should inspire others to take up, should motive others, and should excite others. Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will eliminate all  the extremes of attachment like that.”
Then the Lord said to venerable Subhūti, “Excellent, excellent, Subhūti, that you teach those extremes of attachment that bodhisattva great beings have. Subhūti, I will teach you other sorts of attachment even more subtle than those. Listen well and hard and pay attention, and I will speak to you about them.” 
“Indeed I will,” venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, and he listened to the Lord accordingly. 
The Lord said, “Venerable Subhūti, when those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening pay attention to the tathāgatas as a causal sign, then, to the extent that they pay attention to a causal sign, to that extent they are attached. Furthermore, there are the wholesome roots of those tathāgatas starting from when they first produced the thought, up to their full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, passing into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, and the lasting of their good Dharma. When they pay attention to them, as many as there are, as a causal sign, and while paying attention dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, then, Subhūti, to the extent that they pay attention to a causal sign, to that extent they are attached. There are those wholesome roots of tathāgatas free from all attachment and the wholesome roots of beings other than those. When they pay attention to them as a causal sign and dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, then, Subhūti, to the extent that they pay attention to a causal sign, to that extent they are attached.
“And why? Subhūti, it is because the tathāgatas are not something you should pay attention to as a causal sign,  and the wholesome roots of those other than them are not something you should pay attention to as a causal sign either.” 
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, the perfection of wisdom is deep.”
“Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are isolated in their basic nature,” said the Lord.
“Lord, I bow down to the perfection of wisdom,” said Subhūti
“Subhūti,” said the Lord, “nobody can fully awaken to the perfection of wisdom because it is unmade and has not caused anything to come into being.”
“Lord, it is hard to fully awaken to all dharmas,” said Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” said the Lord, “this is because the basic nature of a dharma is not two; it is simply one. And that one basic nature of a dharma is not a basic nature. What is not a basic nature is not made, and what is not made has not caused anything to come into being. Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings know the one basic nature that is not a basic nature, that is unmade, and that has not caused anything to come into being, they eliminate all the extremes of attachment.”
“Lord, it is hard to realize the perfection of wisdom,” said Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” said the Lord, “this is because nobody has seen, heard, thought about, been conscious of, or fully awakened to the perfection of wisdom.” 
“Lord, the perfection of wisdom is inconceivable,” said Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” said the Lord, “this is because  nobody has known the perfection of wisdom. It is not known through form; it is not known through feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; it is not known through the constituents, sense fields, dependent origination, perfections, all the emptinesses, or dharmas on the side of awakening; and it is not known through the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or distinct attributes of a buddha.”
This was the thirty-sixth chapter, “Teaching the Purity of All Dharmas,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 37: Nobody
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, the perfection of wisdom is not an agent.”
The Lord responded, “Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is the nonapprehender of all dharmas.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?” asked Subhūti
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, if they do not practice form, they practice the perfection of wisdom; if they do not practice feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, they practice the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they do not practice the constituents, sense fields, dependent originations, perfections, emptinesses, dharmas on the side of awakening, powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, distinct attributes of a buddha, up to or the knowledge of all aspects,  they practice the perfection of wisdom.
“If they do not practice with the idea ‘form is permanent’ or ‘impermanent,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. If they do not practice with the idea ‘form is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘self’ or ‘selfless,’ ‘pleasant’ or ‘unpleasant,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, up to if they do not practice with the idea ‘the knowledge of all aspects is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘self’ or ‘selfless,’ ‘pleasant’ or ‘unpleasant,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom.
“And why? Because there is no such form that is permanent or impermanent, happiness or suffering, self or selfless, pleasant or unpleasant; there is no such feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness that is permanent or impermanent, happiness or suffering, self or selfless, pleasant or unpleasant. Similarly, up to there is no such knowledge of all aspects that is permanent or impermanent, happiness or suffering, self or selfless, pleasant or unpleasant.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, if they do not practice with the idea ‘form is completed’ or ‘not completed,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom; similarly, if they do not practice with the idea ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is completed’ or ‘not completed,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom; and similarly, up to if they do not practice with the idea ‘the knowledge of all aspects is completed’ or ‘not completed,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. 
“And why? ‘Form that is completed or not completed is not form.’ If they do not even practice like that, they practice the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness that is completed or not completed is not consciousness.’ If they do not even practice like that, they practice the perfection of wisdom, and similarly, up to ‘the knowledge of all aspects that is completed or not completed is not the knowledge of all aspects.’ If they do not even practice like that, they practice the perfection of wisdom.” 
The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti replied to him, “Lord, such an excellent exposition for bodhisattva great beings of those who are attached and not attached is amazing.” 
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “The tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha gives an excellent exposition of the attachments and nonattachments bodhisattva great beings have.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, if they do not practice with the idea ‘form is not attached,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom; if they do not practice with the idea ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is not attached,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. 
“If they do not practice with the idea ‘the eyes are not attached,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom; similarly, if they do not practice with the idea ‘the ears . . . ,’ ‘the nose . . . ,’ ‘the tongue . . . ,’ ‘the body . . . ,’ or ‘the thinking mind is not attached,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. 
“If they do not practice with the idea ‘the perfection of giving is not attached,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom; similarly, if they do not practice with the idea ‘the perfection of morality . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of patience . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of perseverance . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of concentration . . . ,’ or ‘the perfection of wisdom is not attached,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they do not practice with the idea ‘the ten powers . . . ,’ ‘the fearlessnesses . . . ,’ ‘the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . ,’ ‘the distinct attributes of a buddha . . . ,’ or ‘the knowledge of all aspects is not attached,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom.
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom like that, they do not perceive ‘form is not attached’; they do not perceive ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is not attached’; up to they do not perceive ‘the knowledge of all aspects is not attached.’ They do not perceive ‘the result of stream enterer . . . ,’ ‘the result of once-returner . . . ,’ ‘the result of non-returner . . . ,’ ‘the state of a worthy one . . . ,’ ‘a pratyekabuddha’s awakening,’ or ‘unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is not attached.’ ” 
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, that there is no improvement even with such an exposition of this deep Dharma teaching, and no decline even without an exposition, is amazing.” 
Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord replied to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti,  exactly so! Even with an exposition of the perfection of wisdom there is no improvement, and even without an exposition there is no decline.
“This is like, Subhūti, tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas raising their voice, for as long as they live, in praise and denigration of space. Though they raise their voice in praise it does not improve, and though they raise their voice in denigration it does not decline. Praising space does not improve it and denigrating it does not make it decline. 
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, a voice raised in praise of illusory persons does not improve them, and a voice raised to denigrate them does not make them decline. They are not attached even to a voice raised in praise and do not feel enraged even by a voice raised to denigrate. It is similar, Subhūti, with the true nature of dharmas. It is like that whether it is explained, and it is like that whether it is not explained.”
Subhūti said, “Lord, those bodhisattva great beings who practice the perfection of wisdom, who meditate on the perfection of wisdom and are not cowed, who do the yogic practice of this perfection of wisdom and do not turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are those who do what is difficult. And why? Lord, it is because of this: the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom is the cultivation of space, and the perfection of wisdom does not appear; the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving do not appear in space either. Form does not appear, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not appear in space either. Inner emptiness does not appear, up to and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature does not appear in space either. The applications of mindfulness do not appear; the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path do not appear in space either. The ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha do not appear in space. The result of stream enterer does not appear, and similarly the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening do not appear in space, and neither does unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening appear in space. 
“Those bodhisattva great beings who have buckled on armor for the sake of beings want to strive, want to try, want to make an effort for the sake of space. Lord, those bodhisattva great beings who want armor for the sake of beings want to liberate space. Lord, those bodhisattva great beings who want armor for the sake of all space-like dharmas want great armor. Lord, those bodhisattva great beings who want great armor for the sake of beings want to lift up space into the sky. Lord, those bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening gain the perfection of perseverance. It is to those bodhisattva great beings wanting that sort of armor, Lord, that I bow down. 
“And why? To illustrate, Lord, if  this great billionfold world system were filled with tathāgatas like a thicket of sugarcane, or a thicket of naḍa reeds, or a thicket of bamboo, or a thicket of rushes, or a thicket of rice, or a thicket of sesame, and were those tathāgatas for an eon or for even more than an eon to explain the Dharma, and were each of those tathāgatas to bring infinite, countless beings to maturity, still, a decline or increase in the mass of beings would not appear. And why? Because of the nonexistence of beings, and because of the isolation of beings. By the same token, Lord, I have said, ‘Those bodhisattva great beings who will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the sake of beings want to liberate space.’ ”
Then it occurred to some monk or other to think this: “I bow down to Bhagavatī Prajñāpāramitā, where no dharma is produced and no dharma is stopped and yet there is the aggregate of morality; there is the aggregate of  wisdom and the aggregate of meditative stabilization, aggregate of liberation, and aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation; there is the result of stream enterer, and there is the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; there is also unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; there are the Three Jewels—Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha—and there is the turning of the wheel of the Dharma.” 
Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, what yogic practice are the bodhisattva great beings who are doing the yogic practice of this perfection of wisdom doing?” 
“Kauśika,” replied Subhūti, “bodhisattva great beings who think they should train in this perfection of wisdom do a yogic practice in space.”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, inquired of the Lord, “Lord, how should I guard, protect, and keep safe sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom?”
 Subhūti asked in return, “Kauśika, do you see that dharma you have to guard, protect, and keep safe?”
 “Venerable monk Subhūti, I do not see that dharma I have to guard, protect, and keep safe,” replied Śatakratu,
 “Kauśika,” Subhūti continued, “if sons of a good family or daughters of a good family stand in this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded, just that will guard, protect, and keep them safe. Humans and even  nonhumans find no opportunity to hurt them if they are inseparable from this perfection of wisdom as it has been expounded. Kauśika, whoever thinks that they have to guard, protect, and keep safe bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom thinks that they have to guard, protect, and keep space safe. 
 “What do you think, Kauśika, can you guard, protect, and keep safe an illusion, a mirage, a dream, an echo, or an apparition?”
 “No, venerable monk Subhūti, you cannot,” said Śatakratu.
“Similarly, Kauśika,” said Subhūti, “anyone who thinks they will guard, protect, and keep safe bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom will in that case just become frustrated and get tired out.
 “What do you think, Kauśika, can you guard, protect, and keep safe the dharma-constituent, the very limit of reality, suchness, or the inconceivable element?”
 “No, venerable monk Subhūti, you cannot,” said Śatakratu.
“Similarly, Kauśika,” said Subhūti, “anyone who thinks they will guard, protect, and keep safe bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom will in that case just become frustrated and tire themselves out.” 
 Śatakratu responded, “To the extent, venerable monk Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom comprehend all dharmas to be like a dream, like an illusion, like an echo, like a mirage, like an apparition, like the city of the gandharvas—that they comprehend all dharmas to be like a magical creation—bodhisattva great beings with such a comprehension still do not falsely project it as a dream, do not project the dream as ‘mine,’ do not project anything in a dream, do not project a causal sign of a dream, up to do not falsely project it as a magical creation, do not project the magical creation as ‘mine,’ do not project anything in a magical creation, and do not falsely project a causal sign of a magical creation.”
 “Kauśika,” said Subhūti, “if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not falsely project form, do not project form as ‘mine,’ do not project anything onto form, and do not project a causal sign of form, then they do not falsely project it as a dream, do not project the dream as ‘mine,’ do not project anything onto a dream, do not falsely project a causal sign of a dream; up to they do not falsely project it as a magical creation, do not project the magical creation as ‘mine,’ do not project anything onto a magical creation, and do not falsely project a causal sign of a magical creation. Similarly, if they do not falsely project feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . or consciousness, do not falsely project consciousness as ‘mine,’ do not project anything onto consciousness, and do not project a causal sign of consciousness, up to do not falsely project the knowledge of all aspects, do not project the knowledge of all aspects as ‘mine,’ do not project  anything onto the knowledge of all aspects, and do not project a causal sign of the knowledge of all aspects, then they do not falsely project it as a dream, do not project the dream as ‘mine,’ do not project anything onto a dream, do not project a causal sign of a dream, up to do not falsely project it as a magical creation, do not project the magical creation as ‘mine,’ do not project anything onto a magical creation, and do not falsely project a causal sign of a magical creation.”
Then through the power of the Buddha, all the Cāturmahā­rājika gods and the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapurohita, Brahmapārṣadya, up to the Śuddhāvāsa class of gods, as many as there were stationed in the great billionfold world system, took divine sandalwood powders and specifically strewed them right over the Lord, approached the Lord, went up to him, bowed their heads to the feet of the Lord, and stood to one side.
Then all the Cāturmahā­rājika, Indra, Brahmā, up to the Śuddhāvāsa class of gods focused their thoughts, as they habitually do, through the power of the Buddha on a thousand buddhas in the eastern direction appearing in just these ways teaching the Dharma with just these words; on monks, all of them with the name Subhūti, asking about this very perfection of wisdom and about this very chapter of the Perfection of Wisdom; and on Śatakratus, heads of the gods, all of them asking, through the power of the Buddha, about this very perfection of wisdom. Similarly, they focused their thoughts, as they habitually do, through the power of the Buddha on a thousand buddhas each in the south, west, and north, below and above, and the intermediate directions as well, appearing in just these ways teaching the Dharma with just these words; on monks, all of them with the name Subhūti, asking about  this very perfection of wisdom, about this very chapter of the Perfection of Wisdom; and on Śatakratus, heads of the gods, all of them asking, through the power of the Buddha, about this very perfection of wisdom. 
Then the Lord said to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, will teach just this perfection of wisdom at just this place on the earth as well. Those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas that appear during this Fortunate Age will also, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, teach just this perfection of wisdom at just this place on the earth.” 
The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then inquired of him, “Lord, with which attributes, tokens, and signs will the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, teach this perfection of wisdom?” 
The Lord said, “Subhūti, here the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, will not teach the Dharma ‘form is permanent’ or ‘impermanent’; and similarly, he will not teach the Dharma ‘form is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘form is self’ or ‘selfless,’ or ‘form is pleasant’ or ‘unpleasant.’ He will not teach the Dharma ‘form is bound’ or ‘freed.’ 
“Similarly, he will not teach the Dharma ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is permanent’ or ‘impermanent’; and similarly, he will not teach the Dharma ‘consciousness is happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘consciousness is self’  or ‘selfless,’ or ‘consciousness is pleasant’ or ‘unpleasant.’ He will not teach the Dharma ‘consciousness is bound’ or ‘freed.’ 
“He will not teach the Dharma ‘form is past,’ ‘is future,’ or ‘is present.’ Similarly, he will not teach the Dharma ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is past,’ ‘is future,’ or ‘is present.’ Similarly, up to he will not teach the Dharma ‘the knowledge of all aspects is past,’ ‘is future,’ or ‘is present.’ He will not teach the Dharma ‘the knowledge of all aspects is bound’ or ‘freed.’ ”
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how will the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, teach this perfection of wisdom?” 
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “he will teach the extremely pure Dharma ‘form is extremely pure,’ and similarly, he will teach the extremely pure Dharma ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are extremely pure.’ Similarly, up to he will teach the extremely pure Dharma ‘the knowledge of all aspects is extremely pure.’ ”
“Lord, the perfection of wisdom is pure,’ said Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom is pure because form is pure. Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are pure, up to Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because  the knowledge of all aspects is pure.”
Subhūti asked, “In what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because form is pure? In what way is the perfection of wisdom pure because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are pure, up to in what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because the knowledge of all aspects is pure?”
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “form that is unproduced and unceasing, without defilement and without purification, is pure form. Subhūti, feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness that is unproduced and unceasing, without defilement and without purification, is pure consciousness. Similarly, Subhūti, up to the knowledge of all aspects that is unproduced and unceasing, without defilement and without purification, is the pure knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because space is pure.”
“In what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because space is pure?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “space is pure because it is unproduced and unceasing, without defilement and without purification. 
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because space is untainted.”
“In what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because space is untainted?”  asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom is pure because space cannot be grasped.” 
“In what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because space cannot be grasped?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom is pure because space does not say anything.”
“In what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because space does not say anything?” asked Subhūti.
The Lord replied, “The perfection of wisdom is pure because, Subhūti, just like the two sounds of an echo, to give an analogy, so too space does not say anything.
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because space does not converse about anything.”
“In what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because space does not converse about anything?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “in space there is no conversation at all, so the perfection of wisdom is pure because space does not converse about anything.
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because space cannot be apprehended.”
“In what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because space cannot be apprehended?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “in space there is nothing at all that can be apprehended, so the perfection of wisdom is pure because space cannot be apprehended.
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because form is extremely pure, cannot be apprehended, is unproduced and unceasing,  and without defilement and without purification. Similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are extremely pure, cannot be apprehended, are unproduced and unceasing, and are without defilement and without purification. Similarly, Subhūti, up to the perfection of wisdom is pure because the knowledge of all aspects is extremely pure, cannot be apprehended, is unproduced and unceasing, and is without defilement and without purification. Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because all dharmas are extremely pure, cannot be apprehended, are unproduced and unceasing, and are without defilement and without purification.”
“In what way, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom pure because all dharmas are extremely pure, cannot be apprehended, are unproduced and unceasing, and are without defilement and without purification?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because all dharmas are extremely pure,” replied the Lord.
Subhūti said, “Lord, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom will not contract diseases of the eyes; will not contract diseases of the ears, nose, tongue, or body; and will not contract diseases of the thinking mind, will not have stunted minor parts of the body, and will not have decrepit bodies.  Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will not die in a distressed state. Many thousands of gods who want to listen to the Dharma follow right behind them. The Cāturmahā­rājika, up to the Śuddhāvāsa class of gods follow right behind. On the eighth, the fourteenth, and the fifteenth many hosts of gods gather wherever sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who are Dharma preachers preach the perfection of wisdom. Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who are preaching the perfection of wisdom create a lot of merit—create infinite, countless, inconceivable, immeasurable amounts of merit.” 
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who preach the perfection of wisdom in front of an audience of gods on the eighth, the fourteenth, and the fifteenth create infinite, countless, inconceivable, immeasurable, inexpressible amounts of merit. 
“And why? Subhūti, it is because this—namely, the perfection of wisdom—is a great jewel. Thanks to this, the perfection of wisdom jewel, beings are freed from hell, freed from the animal world, freed from the world of Yama, and freed from being a poor human. 
“They are born in great sāla tree–like royal families, born in great sāla tree–like brahmin families, born in great sāla tree–like business families, up to born as Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana gods. This perfection of wisdom produces the result of stream enterer, and it produces  the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
“And why? Because in this perfection of wisdom the ten wholesome actions are taught in detail. Because thanks to it great sāla tree–like royal families exist, great sāla tree–like brahmin families exist, and great sāla tree–like business families exist; the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods, the Brahmapurohita, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, and Asaṃjñisattva, the Sudarśana, Sudṛśa, Avṛha, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha gods, and the gods in the Ākāśānantyāyatana, Vijñānānantyāyatana, Ākiṃcityāyatana, and Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana exist; the result of stream enterer exists, and the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening exist. Because in this perfection of wisdom the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions exist; the perfection of giving exists; the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom exist; the applications of mindfulness exist; the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path exist; inner emptiness, up to the existence of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature exists; the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha exist, up to the knowledge of all aspects exists, that is to say, in this perfection of wisdom those dharmas and so on are taught in detail. Therefore this—that is, the perfection of wisdom—is a great jewel.
 “Subhūti, in the perfection of wisdom there is no dharma that is produced or ceases, is defiled or purified, or is appropriated or rejected at all. And why? Because those dharmas that could be produced or cease, or could be defiled or purified, or could be appropriated or rejected do not exist.
 “Subhūti, you cannot apprehend any dharma that is wholesome or unwholesome, with outflows or without outflows, a basic immorality or not a basic immorality, with afflictions or without afflictions, ordinary or extraordinary, compounded or uncompounded in this perfection of wisdom jewel at all. Subhūti, because of this one of many explanations, this perfection is a great jewel. 
 “Subhūti, that perfection is a great jewel because that great jewel is not tainted by any dharma. And why? Because you cannot apprehend that dharma on account of which it might become tainted. Therefore, Subhūti, this great jewel perfection is untainted. 
 “Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom thus do not form any notion and thus do not conceive, thus do not apprehend, thus do not engage in thought construction, they are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they are meditating on the perfection of wisdom, and they see the lord buddhas. They go from  buddhafield to buddhafield to respect, revere, honor, and worship those lord buddhas, and when they are going from buddhafield to buddhafield they also bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield.
 “Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom does not cause any dharma to be gained, does not teach it, does not cause it to be borne in mind, does not bestow it, does not make it arise, does not make it stop, does not make it defiled, does not make it pure, does not make it decline, and does not make it increase. It is not past, or future, or present either. 
 “Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom also does not cause the desire realm to be transcended, and it does not make it be there either. It does not cause the form realm to be transcended, and it does not make it be there either. It does not cause the formless realm to be transcended, and it does not make it be there either. It does not bestow the perfection of giving, and it also does not remove it; it does not bestow the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom, and it also does not remove them. It does not bestow inner emptiness, and it also does not remove it; it does not bestow, up to the existence of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and it also does not remove it. It does not bestow the applications of mindfulness, and it also does not remove them. Similarly, it does not bestow the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path, and it also does not remove them. It does not bestow the ten powers, and it also does not remove them; it does not bestow the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges,  or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and it also does not remove them. It does not bestow the result of stream enterer, and it also does not remove it; it does not bestow the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or the knowledge of all aspects, and it also does not remove them. 
 “This perfection of wisdom does not bestow the buddhadharmas, and it also does not remove them; it does not bestow the dharmas of ordinary persons, and it also does not remove them; it does not bestow the dharmas of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, and it also does not remove them; it does not bestow the buddha dharmas, and it also does not remove them. Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom does not remove the compounded element, and it does not bestow the uncompounded element. 
 “And why? Because this principle of the dharma-constituent simply remains whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, and the tathāgatas fully awaken to and are clearly aware of it, and while fully awakened and clearly aware they speak about it and explain, reveal, and teach it.” 
 Then a great many hundred thousands of gods standing in the sky above shouted and let out a cheer, and while strewing down blue lotus, lotus, red lotus, white lotus, and coral tree flowers they also exclaimed, “Ah! We are seeing a second turning of the wheel of the Dharma in the world.” And while this perfection of wisdom was being taught, a great many thousands of gods  gained the forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas from it. 
 Then the Lord said to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, given the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, this perfection of wisdom has not been made available because any Dharma has to be engaged in or backed away from, so it is not a second turning of the wheel of Dharma, and it is not a first turning either.”
 “Lord, what is the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature when this perfection of wisdom has not been made available in order to turn forward or turn backward any Dharma?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom, and similarly, the perfection of concentration . . . , perseverance . . . , patience . . . , morality . . . , and giving is empty of the perfection of giving. Inner emptiness is empty of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness, and similarly, the right efforts . . . , the legs of miraculous power . . . , the faculties . . . , the powers . . . , the limbs of awakening . . . , and path is empty of the path. The ten powers are empty of the ten powers, and the four fearlessnesses . . . , the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. The result of stream enterer is empty of the result of stream enterer, and similarly, the result of once-returner . . . , the result of non-returner . . . , the state of a worthy one . . . , a pratyekabuddha’s awakening . . . , and the knowledge of all aspects is empty of the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 Subhūti said, “This—that is,  the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the perfection of wisdom—is a great perfection. All dharmas are empty of the intrinsic nature of all dharmas, but still bodhisattva great beings, thanks to this perfection of wisdom, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening without fully awakening to any dharma at all, will turn the wheel of the Dharma even though any Dharma that has to be engaged in or backed away from does not exist, will not see any Dharma at all, and will not not see any Dharma at all either. And why? Because a dharma that engages or backs away cannot be apprehended, because all dharmas absolutely do not come into being, so emptiness does not engage, nor does it back away; the signless and the wishless also do not engage, nor do they back away. 
 “Therefore, this teaching of the perfection of wisdom, this illumination, discourse, exposition, advancement, explanation, revelation, description, making clear, and explication is the teaching of the perfection of wisdom that is perfectly pure. Nobody teaches that teaching of the perfection of wisdom, and nobody receives it, and what nobody has taught and nobody has received, that nobody has directly realized. And what nobody has taught, nobody has received, and nobody has directly realized, there nobody has entered into nirvāṇa either. And in this Dharma teaching there is also nobody who becomes worthy of offerings.”
This was the thirty-seventh chapter, “Nobody,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 38: Cannot Be Apprehended
Then  venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection of a nonexistent thing.” 
 “Because space is a nonexistent thing, Subhūti,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection of equality,” said Subhūti.
 “Because all dharmas are equally nonapprehendable, Subhūti,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection of isolation,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because of the emptiness that transcends limits,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that cannot be crushed,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all dharmas are unfindable,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection with no basis,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because of not having a name and body,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection like space,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the movement of breath in and out is unfindable,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without language,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because applied and sustained thought is unfindable,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a nameless perfection,”  said Subhūti.
 “Because the feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness aggregates are unfindable,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that does not go away,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all phenomena do not go away,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is not stolen,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all dharmas cannot be seized,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that has not come to an end,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all dharmas have come to an end in extreme purity,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that has no arising,” said Subhūti.
 “Because all dharmas do not arise and do not stop,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without a maker,” said Subhūti.
 “Because a maker is unfindable,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without a knower,” said Subhūti.
 “Because a knower is unfindable,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that does not change places,” said Subhūti.
 “Because death and rebirth are unfindable,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord,  this perfection of wisdom is an indestructible perfection,” said Subhūti.
 “Because all dharmas are indestructible in their nature, death and rebirth cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a dream-like perfection,” said Subhūti.
 “Because a dream that has been dreamed cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is an echo-like perfection,” said Subhūti.
 “Because a sound called out cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is an apparition-like perfection,” said Subhūti.
 “Because a reflection in a mirror cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a mirage-like perfection,” said Subhūti.
 “Because falling water cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is an illusion-like perfection,” said Subhūti.
 “Because a causal sign cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without confusion,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the gloom of ignorance cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without defilement,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because defilement cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord,  this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without purification,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the presence of defilement cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that does not stand,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all phenomena cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that cannot be apprehended,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the possible cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without thought construction,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all thought construction has been destroyed,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without false projection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all false projection has been destroyed,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is an immovable perfection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because of the establishment of the dharma-constituent,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a detached perfection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because it is a full awakening to all dharmas as unmistaken suchness,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without obsession,”  said Subhūti.
 “Because all dharmas are in a state where there is no conceptualization,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a calm perfection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all dharmas are without causal signs and cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without greed,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the causal sign of greed cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without hate,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because hate is not real,” replied the Lord. 
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without confusion,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because of blowing away the darkness of confusion,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without affliction,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because it is without false imagination,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without a being,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because a being cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is not a means of measurement,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all phenomena do not fully arise,”  replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is not at the two extremes,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because an extreme is unfindable,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a distinct perfection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all phenomena are distinct,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is an untarnished perfection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because it has gone beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that does not conceptualize,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because conceptualization cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without a measure,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the measure of all phenomena cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a space-like perfection,” said Subhūti.
 “Because all phenomena are without attachment, like space,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is an impermanent perfection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because there is no destruction of all phenomena,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a suffering perfection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all phenomena are not suitable to be clung to,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a selfless perfection,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all phenomena are not settled down on,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is emptiness,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because an intrinsic nature of all phenomena cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection without a defining mark,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all phenomena have no causal sign,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is inner emptiness,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all inner phenomena cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the outer emptiness,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all outer phenomena cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is inner and outer emptiness,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because all inner and outer phenomena cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of emptiness,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the emptiness of emptiness cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the great emptiness,”  said Subhūti.
 “Because the great emptiness cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of ultimate reality,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the emptiness of ultimate reality cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of the compounded,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the emptiness of the compounded cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of the uncompounded,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the emptiness of the uncompounded cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of what transcends limits,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the emptiness of what transcends limits cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of no beginning and no end,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the emptiness of no beginning and no end cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of nonrepudiation,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because the emptiness of nonrepudiation cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of a basic nature,” said Subhūti. 
 “Because compounded and uncompounded dharmas  cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of all dharmas,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the emptiness of all dharmas cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of its own mark,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the emptiness of its own mark cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of not apprehending,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the emptiness of not apprehending cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of a nonexistent thing,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the emptiness of a nonexistent thing cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness of an intrinsic nature,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the emptiness of an intrinsic nature cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the applications of mindfulness,” said Subhūti.
 “Because body, feeling, mind, and dharmas cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord. 
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the right efforts,” said Subhūti.
 “Because wholesome and unwholesome dharmas cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the legs of miraculous power,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the four legs of miraculous power cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the faculties,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the five faculties cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the powers,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the five powers cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the limbs of awakening,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the seven limbs of awakening cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the path,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the eightfold path cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is emptiness,” said Subhūti.
 “Because distortion cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is signlessness,” said Subhūti.
 “Because conceptualization cannot be apprehended,”  replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is wishlessness,” said Subhūti.
 “Because a wish cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is deliverance,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the eight deliverances cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is absorption,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the nine serial absorptions cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the noble truth,” said Subhūti.
 “Because suffering, origination, cessation, and path cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is giving,” said Subhūti.
 “Because miserliness cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is morality,” said Subhūti.
 “Because immorality cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is patience,” said Subhūti.
 “Because malice cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is perseverance,”  said Subhūti.
 “Because laziness cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is concentration,” said Subhūti.
 “Because distraction cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is wisdom,” said Subhūti.
 “Because intellectual confusion cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the ten powers,” said Subhūti.
 “Because all the aspects of all dharmas cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is fearlessness,” said Subhūti.
 “Because the knowledge of path aspects cannot be apprehended,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is detailed and thorough knowledge,” said Subhūti.
 “Because knowledge is totally unattached and unimpeded,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is great compassion,” said Subhūti.
 “Because it does not forsake all beings,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is the distinct attributes of a buddha,” said Subhūti.
 “Because it has gone beyond all śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha attributes,”  replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is suchness,” said Subhūti.
 “Because it is the suchness of all that has been said,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is self-originated,” said Subhūti.
 “Because it is in control of all dharmas,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is buddha,” said Subhūti.
 “Because it has fully awakened to all aspects of all phenomena,” replied the Lord.
This was the thirty-eighth chapter, “Cannot Be Apprehended,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 39: The Northern Region
Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods, to think, “Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family must have served the earlier victors well for the proclamation of this perfection of wisdom to be within their range of hearing; their wholesome roots must be sprung from the Tathāgata, and they must have been assisted by spiritual friends for the proclamation of this perfection of wisdom to be within their range of hearing too, so what need is there to say more about those who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, and master it, and about those who, having taken it up and borne it in mind, read it aloud, and mastered it, also practice it for suchness? Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, and master this perfection of wisdom, and who, having taken it up and borne it in mind, read it aloud and mastered it, also practice it for suchness, have attended on many buddhas. Those sons of a good family  or daughters of a good family who do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified even when they have listened to this deep perfection of wisdom have also made inquiries about it with earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. Those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified even when they have listened to this deep perfection of wisdom have also practiced the perfection of giving and practiced the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom for many hundred millions of eons.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra said to the Lord, “Lord, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified even when they have listened to this deep perfection of wisdom, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly strive for this perfection of wisdom, should be treated just as one treats the bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening. And why? Because, Lord, this perfection of wisdom is deep, and because those who have not practiced the six perfections before are not able to believe in this deep perfection of wisdom. Lord, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have it in mind to reject this deep perfection of wisdom are those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have rejected this deep perfection of wisdom in the past as well. And why? Lord, it is because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who do not have faith in, do not like, and do not have a serene confidence in this perfection of wisdom are  those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who do not inquire of the buddhas or śrāvakas of the buddhas, ‘How do you practice the perfection of giving? How do you practice the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom? How do you cultivate inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature? How do you cultivate the applications of mindfulness? How do you cultivate the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and paths? How do you cultivate the ten tathāgata powers? How do you cultivate the fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha?’ ” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to venerable Śāriputra, “Venerable monk Śāriputra, what is the big surprise, given that this perfection of wisdom is so deep, that those bodhisattva great beings who in the past did not believe in this deep perfection of wisdom; did not believe in the perfection of giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom; did not believe in inner emptiness, up to did not believe in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; did not believe in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; did not believe in the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, five clairvoyances, or  eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—what is the big surprise that they reject this deep perfection of wisdom? It is no big surprise. 
 “Venerable monk Śāriputra, one who bows down to this deep perfection of wisdom bows down to the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. I bow down to Bhagavatī Prajñāpāramitā.”
 Then the Lord said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so! One who bows down to this deep perfection of wisdom bows down to the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. And why? Kauśika, it is because the knowledge of all aspects has come forth from this perfection of wisdom, and a knower of the knowledge of all aspects generates the perfection of wisdom, so a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who wants to stand in the knowledge of all aspects should stand in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who wants to produce the knowledge of a knower of all aspects; who wants to destroy all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions; who wants to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and who wants to turn the wheel of the Dharma should stand in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to establish beings in the result of stream enterer; who want to establish them in the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the result of a worthy one; who want to establish them in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; who want to establish beings in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening;  and who want to draw together a community of monks should practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom.” 
 The Lord having said that, Śatakratu, head of the gods, inquired of him, “Lord, how do those bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of wisdom? How do they practice the yoga? How do they stand in the perfection of concentration, perseverance, patience, morality, and giving? How do they practice the yoga? How, practicing the perfection of wisdom, do they practice the yoga of inner emptiness, up to how do they practice the yoga of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature? Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom practice the yoga of the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening? Similarly, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom practice the yoga of the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the five clairvoyances, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha?” 
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, having thus inquired, the Lord replied to him, “Excellent, Kauśika, excellent that you have it in mind to inquire of the Tathāgata about this topic! Kauśika, your confidence giving a readiness to speak has arisen through the power of the Buddha, so listen well and hard and pay attention, and I will speak to you about it. 
 “Here, Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not stand  in form, and when they do not stand in form they practice the yoga of form. Similarly, they do not stand in feeling . . . , they do not stand in perception . . . , they do not stand in volitional factors . . . , and they do not stand in consciousness, and when they do not stand in consciousness they practice the yoga of consciousness. Similarly, they do not stand in the eyes . . . , and they do not stand in the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, or the thinking mind, and thus they practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, they do not stand in a form, and they do not stand in a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, or dharmas, and thus they practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, they do not stand in the perfection of giving and thus practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, they do not stand in the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom, and thus practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. They do not stand in inner emptiness and thus practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. They do not stand in . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature and thus practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. They do not stand in the applications of mindfulness and thus practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, they do not stand in the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or paths and thus practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. They do not stand in the four immeasurables and thus practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. They do not stand in the four concentrations, four formless absorptions, or five clairvoyances; and they do not stand in the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha,  and thus they practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom. 
 “And why? Because they cannot apprehend that form that they might stand in or the application to it that they might practice. Similarly, it is because they cannot apprehend feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; and similarly, the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha that they might stand in or the yoga of which they might practice.
 “Furthermore, Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings do not apply themselves to form, and because they do not apply themselves to form like that, they practice the yoga of form. Similarly, they do not apply themselves to feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , or consciousness, and because they do not apply themselves to consciousness like that, they practice the yoga of consciousness. Similarly, they do not apply themselves to the constituents . . . , the sense fields . . . , dependent origination . . . , the perfections . . . , the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . , all the emptinesses . . . , the ten powers . . . , the fearlessnesses . . . , the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and because they do not apply themselves to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha like that, they practice the yoga of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. 
 “And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings do not apprehend form as past, do not apprehend form as future, and do not apprehend form as present. Similarly, they do not apprehend feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , or consciousness  as past, do not apprehend consciousness as future, and do not apprehend consciousness as present. Similarly, they do not apprehend the constituents . . . , the sense fields . . . , dependent origination . . . , the perfections . . . , the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . , all the emptinesses . . . , the ten powers . . . , the fearlessnesses . . . , the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha as past, do not apprehend them as future, and do not apprehend them as present.”
 Venerable Śāriputra then said to the Lord, “Lord, the perfection of wisdom is deep.”
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “because the suchness of form is deep, the perfection of wisdom is deep. Śāriputra, similarly, because the suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is deep, the perfection of wisdom is deep. Śāriputra, similarly, because the suchness of the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha are deep, the perfection of wisdom is deep.”
 “Lord, the perfection of wisdom is hard to fathom,” said Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “because the suchness of form is hard to fathom, the perfection of wisdom is hard to fathom. Śāriputra, similarly, because the suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is hard to fathom, the perfection of wisdom is hard to fathom.  Śāriputra, similarly, because the suchness of the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha is hard to fathom, the perfection of wisdom is hard to fathom.
 “Lord, the perfection of wisdom is immeasurable,” said Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “because the suchness of form is immeasurable, the perfection of wisdom is immeasurable. Śāriputra, similarly, because the suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is immeasurable, the perfection of wisdom is immeasurable. Śāriputra, similarly, because the suchness of the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha is immeasurable, the perfection of wisdom is immeasurable.
 Śāriputra then asked, “Lord, how then do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
“Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “if bodhisattva great beings do not practice with the idea ‘form is deep,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they do not practice with the idea ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is deep,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they do not practice with the idea ‘the constituents . . . ,’ ‘the sense fields . . . ,’ ‘dependent origination . . . ,’ ‘the perfections . . . ,’  ‘the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . ,’ ‘all the emptinesses . . . ,’ ‘the ten powers . . . ,’ ‘the fearlessnesses . . . ,’ ‘the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . ,’ or ‘the distinct attributes of a buddha are deep,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom.
 “And why? Śāriputra, it is because if they also do not practice with the idea ‘it is because the depth of form is not form’ and ‘the depth of feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . ,  and consciousness is not consciousness’; and similarly ‘the depth of the constituents . . . , the sense fields . . . , dependent origination . . . , the perfections . . . , the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . , all the emptinesses . . . , the ten powers . . . , the fearlessnesses . . . ,  the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , and the distinct attributes of a buddha is not the buddhadharmas,’ they thus practice the perfection of wisdom.
“Śāriputra, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not practice with the idea ‘form is hard to fathom,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. If they do not practice with the idea ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is hard to fathom,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they do not practice with the idea ‘the constituents . . . ,’ ‘the sense fields . . . ,’ ‘dependent origination . . . ,’ ‘the perfections . . . ,’ ‘the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . ,’ ‘all the emptinesses . . . ,’ ‘the ten powers . . . ,’ ‘the fearlessnesses . . . ,’ ‘the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . ,’ or ‘the distinct attributes of a buddha are hard to fathom,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom.
 “And why? Śāriputra, it is because if they do not practice with the idea ‘that state of being hard to fathom of form is not form; that state of being hard to fathom of feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness is not consciousness; and similarly, that state of being hard to fathom of the constituents . . . , the sense fields . . . , dependent origination . . . , the perfections . . . , the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . , all the emptinesses . . . , the ten powers . . . , the fearlessnesses . . . , the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , and the distinct attributes of a buddha is not the buddhadharmas,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because that state of being hard to fathom of the buddhadharmas is not the buddhadharmas.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not practice with the idea ‘form is immeasurable,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they do not practice with the idea ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is immeasurable,’ they practice the perfection of wisdom. And why? Śāriputra, it is because the immeasurability of form is not form; the immeasurability of feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness is not consciousness; and similarly, the immeasurability of the constituents . . . , the sense fields . . . , dependent origination . . . , the perfections . . . , all the emptinesses . . . , the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening . . . , the ten powers . . . , the fearlessnesses . . . , the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , and the distinct attributes of a buddha is not the buddhadharmas. And why? Śāriputra, it is because the immeasurability  of the distinct attributes of a buddha is not the distinct attributes of a buddha.” 
 Śāriputra said, “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is just as deep as that, just as hard to fathom as that, just as hard to understand as that, and just as immeasurable as that, so an exposition of it should not be given in the presence of bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle, because they will tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified when they hear this perfection of wisdom. An exposition of it should be given in the presence of bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening because they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified, do not feel unsure, and do not harbor doubt when they hear this perfection of wisdom, and on top of that they also believe it when they hear it.” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked venerable Śāriputra, “Venerable monk Śāriputra, what is wrong with giving an exposition of this deep perfection of wisdom in the presence of bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle?”
 “Kauśika,” replied Śāriputra, “when an exposition of this deep perfection of wisdom is given in the presence of bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle, they tremble, feel frightened, become terrified, reject it, and do not believe in it. Kauśika, because those bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle reject this deep perfection of wisdom when they hear it and amass the karma of those headed to a blunder, they are hard-pressed to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening even for a very long time.”
 “Venerable monk Śāriputra, are there  bodhisattva great beings who have not been prophesied who, when they hear this deep perfection of wisdom, do not tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified?” asked Śatakratu.
 “Kauśika,” replied Śāriputra, “those bodhisattva great beings who do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when they hear this deep perfection of wisdom obtain a prophecy before long of their unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They obtain a prophecy of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening before they have passed beyond more than one or two tathāgatas.”
 Then the Lord said to venerable Śāriputra, “Exactly so, Śāriputra, exactly so! Śāriputra, those bodhisattva great beings who do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when they hear this deep perfection of wisdom and, on top of that, having heard this perfection of wisdom, take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, and keep on with it as it has been taught have long set out in the vehicle, practice the practice of the six perfections, and serve many buddhas with their service.” 
 Venerable Śāriputra then said to the Lord, “Lord, I have great confidence giving a readiness to speak, and I set forth an illustration. Tathāgata, I have the confidence giving a readiness to speak.”
 “Be confident in your readiness to speak then, Śāriputra,” replied the Lord.
 Śāriputra said, “To illustrate, Lord, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have set out in the Great Vehicle might dream in a dream they are cultivating the perfection of wisdom and are cultivating the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience,  perfection of morality, and perfection of giving, up to going to the site of awakening. Lord, if those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family are known to be approaching unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, Lord, when it comes to those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who, having woken up, intend to cultivate the perfection of wisdom, and cultivate the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving, to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and, having fully awakened, to go to the site of awakening and turn the wheel of the Dharma, what need is there to say that they are approaching unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Lord, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who get to hear this deep perfection of wisdom and then practice it exactly as they have heard it have wholesome roots that have matured. Lord, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who, having heard this perfection of wisdom, take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, and properly pay attention to it have long set out in the vehicle, have planted wholesome roots, have served many buddhas, and have been assisted by spiritual friends. 
 “Lord, those bodhisattvas and sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who get this perfection of wisdom and, having got it, take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it,  and properly pay attention to it, of those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family, Lord, their awakening is close to being prophesied, or it will be prophesied, or they will become irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “To illustrate, Lord, a person might emerge from a vast jungle a hundred yojanas wide or might emerge from a vast jungle two hundred yojanas wide, or three hundred yojanas wide, or four hundred yojanas wide, or five hundred yojanas wide, and when they emerge they might see cow herders, or goat herders, or the boundary markers of fields, or parks, or orchards that are signs presaging a town, or they might see some other signs presaging a town, or villages, or markets, or cities, or kingdoms. When they do so they would think, ‘These kinds of signs presage a town, or village, or market, or city, or kingdom, or palace, so one must be near at hand.’ They would breathe out a sigh of relief and would not face danger from robbers, danger from poisonous animals, danger from savages, danger from angry wild animals, or danger from hunger and thirst anymore. 
 “Similarly, Lord, with bodhisattva great beings who get this deep perfection of wisdom and, having got it, take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, and properly pay attention to it—Lord, it is known that the awakening of those bodhisattva great beings is close to being prophesied and that before long they will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Those  bodhisattva great beings do not face the danger of the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. And why? Because there are those signs presaging that—that is, that the bodhisattva great beings get to see, bow down to, and serve this deep perfection of wisdom and get to hear it.” 
 Venerable Śāriputra having said this, the Lord said to him, “Excellent, Śāriputra, excellent. Be even more confident in your readiness to speak, Śāriputra, through the power of the Buddha.”
 Śāriputra said, “To illustrate, Lord, a person who wants to see the ocean goes off to see the ocean, and as they are going off to see the ocean they see trees or signs of trees, or mountains or signs of mountains, and they can know because of that ‘The ocean is a long way from here. The ocean is not near here.’ And why? Because there are no trees or signs of trees, or mountains or signs of mountains, when the ocean is near. 
 “To illustrate further, Lord, a person who wants to see the ocean goes off to see the ocean, and as they are going off to see the ocean they see no trees or signs of trees, or mountains or signs of mountains, and it occurs to them to think, ‘The ocean is not a long way from here.’ And why? Because there are no trees or signs of trees, or mountains or signs of mountains, when the ocean is near. Even though that person does not see the ocean with their eyes, they become certain, ‘I am close to the ocean. The ocean is near here. The ocean is not a long way from here.’ 
 “Similarly, Lord, bodhisattva great beings who hear, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, and master this perfection of wisdom can thus know, can thus think, ‘Even though the Tathāgata has not prophesied in my presence, “You will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in some certain amount of eons, or in eons amounting to a hundred, or in eons amounting to a thousand, or in eons amounting to a hundred thousand, or in eons amounting to one hundred million billion,” ’ those bodhisattva great beings can know, ‘My unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is close to being prophesied.’ And why? Because they think, ‘I have got this deep perfection of wisdom to see and hear, and having heard it I have taken it up, borne it in mind, read it aloud, mastered it, and properly paid attention to it.’
 “To illustrate further, Lord, when spring has come and the buds and blossoms have come out on the trees, the people of Jambudvīpa can know, because of that, the leaves, flowers, and fruit will appear before long. And why? Because there are those signs presaging that on the trees. When the people of Jambudvīpa see those signs presaging that on the trees, they think, ‘It will not be long now before the leaves, flowers, and fruit appear,’ and they are enraptured. 
 “Similarly, Lord, when bodhisattva great beings get to view  and hear this deep perfection of wisdom, and having heard it take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, and properly pay attention to it, Lord, those bodhisattva great beings can know that their wholesome roots have matured. Lord, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family can know that they have attended again and again on many buddhas. Lord, those bodhisattva great beings also can know, ‘We are close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because we have found this deep perfection of wisdom and have seen, heard, bowed down to, and practiced the perfection of wisdom as it has been explained, because of those earlier wholesome roots.’ There the gods who have seen buddhas before think, ‘Earlier bodhisattvas also had such signs as these presaging their prophecy, so it will not be long before the prophecy of the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of these bodhisattva great beings happens too.’ They rejoice and feel joy; a joy and mental happiness arise.
 “To illustrate further, Lord, when a woman is pregnant her body undergoes changes as she gets closer and closer to giving birth. Physically she feels utterly exhausted, she does not move about, and she is forgetful, has no appetite, finds it hard to get drowsy and fall asleep, and becomes taciturn because of feeling that way. And, realizing that her experience of those sorts of feelings is because of having indulged in that earlier improper attention, indulged in it  frequently and fully, she steers clear of her proclivity for sex. Other women see the signs presaging that in that woman and come to realize, ‘It will not be long before that woman gives birth.’ 
 “Similarly, Lord, bodhisattva great beings who have planted wholesome roots, served many buddhas, practiced the practices well, and been assisted by spiritual friends and whose wholesome roots have matured get this deep perfection of wisdom and, having got it, take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, and properly pay attention to it. They can know it will not be long before the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of those bodhisattva great beings will be prophesied.” 
 The Lord responded, “This confidence giving a readiness to speak that you had, Śāriputra, through the power of the Buddha, is excellent, Śāriputra, excellent.” 
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, it is amazing that the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha has benefited these bodhisattva great beings like this.”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “it is because bodhisattva great beings have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to benefit many people, to make many people happy, out of pity for the world, for the welfare of the mass of gods and humans, for benefit and happiness.  When those bodhisattva great beings pursue their career they benefit many thousands of bodhisattva great beings in the four ways of gathering a retinue—giving gifts, kind words, beneficial actions, and consistency between words and deeds; cause beings to take up the ten wholesome actions; and cause them to take up the four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions; and they establish themselves in those dharmas too. They personally practice the perfection of giving, and they cause others to take up the perfection of giving as well; they personally practice the perfection of morality . . . , the perfection of patience . . . , the perfection of perseverance . . . , the perfection of concentration . . . , and the perfection of wisdom, and they cause others to take up the perfection of wisdom as well. Thanks to the perfection of wisdom, with skillful means they establish beings in the result of stream enterer, but they do not themselves actualize it. Similarly, they establish beings in the result of once-returner . . . , the result of non-returner . . . , the state of a worthy one . . . , and the state of a pratyekabuddha, but they do not themselves actualize it. They personally step onto the irreversible level, and they establish others at the irreversible level as well. They personally purify a buddhafield, and they personally cause other bodhisattvas to take up the purification of a buddhafield as well; they personally bring beings to maturity, and they cause others to take up bringing beings to maturity as well; they personally produce the clairvoyances,  and they cause others to take up gaining the clairvoyances as well; they personally purify the dhāraṇī gateways, and they cause others to take up the purification of the dhāraṇī gateways as well; they personally gain perfected confidence giving a readiness to speak, and they cause others to take up perfecting confidence giving a readiness to speak as well; they personally appropriate a perfected physical form, and they cause others to take up the appropriation of a perfected physical form as well; they personally appropriate perfected major marks, and they cause others to take up the appropriation of perfected major marks as well; they personally appropriate the state of the perfected unmarried person, and they cause others to take up gaining the state of the perfected unmarried person as well; they personally perfect the ten tathāgata powers, and they cause others to take up perfecting the ten tathāgata powers as well; they personally generate the ten concentrations, and they cause others to take up the generation of the ten concentrations as well; they personally generate the four immeasurables . . . , the four formless absorptions . . . , the four fearlessnesses . . . , and the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and they cause others to take up the generation of the four detailed and thorough knowledges as well; they personally perfect the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and they cause others to take up perfecting the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha as well; they personally reach the knowledge of all aspects, and they cause others to take up the knowledge of all aspects as well; they personally eliminate all residual impressions, connections,  and afflictions, and they cause others to take up the elimination of all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions as well; they personally fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and they cause others to take up fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening as well; and they personally turn the wheel of the Dharma, and they cause others to take up turning the wheel of the Dharma as well.”
 Subhūti said, “Lord, it is amazing that those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom for the sake of beings will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in possession of many good qualities like this. Sugata, it is amazing! 
 “Lord, how is meditation on the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings completed?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see an increase in form and do not see an increase in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, then meditation on the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings is completed. Similarly, when they do not see an increase in the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges,  the distinct attributes of a buddha, or the knowledge of all aspects, then meditation on the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings is completed.
 “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see a decline in form and do not see a decline in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, then meditation on the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings is completed. Similarly, when they do not see a decline in the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the distinct attributes of a buddha, or the knowledge of all aspects, then meditation on the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings is completed.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see ‘a dharma’ and do not see ‘not a dharma’; do not see ‘past,’ do not see ‘future,’ and do not see ‘present’; do not see ‘wholesome, unwholesome, neutral, and not neutral’;  do not see ‘compounded and uncompounded’; do not see ‘the desire realm,’ do not see ‘the form realm,’ and do not see ‘the formless realm’; do not see ‘the perfection of giving’ and do not see ‘the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom’; up to do not see ‘the knowledge of all aspects,’ then the meditation on the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings is completed. And why? Subhūti, it is because what marks dharmas as dharmas is irreversibility, vanity, hollowness, pointlessness, and fraudulence.”
 “Lord, the inconceivable is being taught,” said Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “it is a teaching of the inconceivable because form is inconceivable. It is a teaching of the inconceivable because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are inconceivable. It is a teaching of the inconceivable because the perfection of giving is inconceivable. Similarly, it is a teaching of the inconceivable because the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom are inconceivable. Similarly, it is a teaching of the inconceivable because the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses,  the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is inconceivable.
 “Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not form the notion ‘form is inconceivable’ and do not form the notion ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are inconceivable,’ then meditation on the perfection of wisdom is completed. If they do not form the notion ‘the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the distinct attributes of a buddha  . . .’ up to ‘the knowledge of all aspects is inconceivable,’ then meditation on the perfection of wisdom is completed.”
 “Lord, who will come to believe in this deep perfection of wisdom?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings who have earlier practiced the practice of the six perfections, planted wholesome roots sprung from the Tathāgata, served many buddhas with their service, and been assisted by spiritual friends will come to believe in this deep perfection of wisdom.”
 “Lord, to what extent will bodhisattva great beings have practiced the six perfections, planted wholesome roots sprung from the Tathāgata, served many buddhas, and been assisted  by spiritual friends?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not mentally construct and do not conceive of form, do not mentally construct and do not conceive of a causal sign of form, and do not mentally construct and do not conceive of an intrinsic nature of form. They do not mentally construct and do not conceive of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; do not mentally construct and do not conceive of a causal sign of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; and do not mentally construct and do not conceive of an intrinsic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Similarly, they do not mentally construct and do not conceive of the constituents, sense fields, or dependent origination; the desire, form, or formless realms; the perfection of giving; the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom; inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path; the ten tathāgata powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, or the distinct attributes of a buddha; up to do not mentally construct and do not conceive of the knowledge of all aspects, do not mentally construct and do not conceive of a causal sign of the knowledge of all aspects, and do not mentally construct and do not conceive of an intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Subhūti, it is because form is inconceivable; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are inconceivable; and similarly, the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges,  the distinct attributes of a buddha, and also the knowledge of all aspects are inconceivable. In that case, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings will have practiced the six perfections, planted wholesome roots sprung from the Tathāgata, served many buddhas, and been assisted by spiritual friends.”
 Subhūti responded, “Lord, the perfection of wisdom is deep because form is deep. The perfection of wisdom is deep because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are deep. Similarly, the perfection of wisdom is deep because the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination, the perfections, all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha are deep. The perfection of wisdom is deep because the knowledge of all aspects is deep. 
 “Lord, the perfection of wisdom is a heap of jewels insofar as it generates the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening that are great jewels.
 “Lord, this perfection of wisdom turns the wheel of the Dharma. Lord, the perfection of wisdom is an aggregate of the purity of all dharmas.”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “it is because of the purity of form, the purity of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, and the purity of the constituents, the sense fields, dependent origination,  the perfections, all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the distinct attributes of a buddha, and the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 “Lord, that such an exposition of this deep perfection of wisdom would not give rise to many hindrances would be amazing,” said Subhūti.
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “There are many hindrances to this deep perfection of wisdom. Sons of a good family or daughters of a good family copying out, teaching, reading aloud, explaining, properly paying attention to, and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom should quickly write it out and quickly cultivate it before hindrances to copying out, reading aloud, teaching, explaining, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom arise. And why? Because even if those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family are copying for a month, they should do the copying accordingly; even if they are copying for two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven months, or for up to a year, they should do the copying accordingly; and even if they are explaining, reciting from memory, illuminating, properly paying attention to, and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom for up to a year, they should do the cultivation accordingly. And why? Subhūti, it is because this great jewel gives rise to many hindrances.”
 “Lord, Māra the wicked one will cause hindrances, will he not, to this deep perfection of wisdom, in order that it will not be copied out, will not be read aloud, will not be recited from memory, will not be properly paid attention to,  and will not be cultivated?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “Māra the wicked one will indeed make whatever efforts he can to cause hindrances to this deep perfection of wisdom, in order that it will not be copied out, will not be read aloud, will not be recited from memory, up to will not be cultivated, but he cannot hinder bodhisattva great beings copying out, reading aloud, reciting from memory, properly paying attention to, and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked the Lord, “Lord, because of whose power is Māra the wicked one incapable of hindering bodhisattva great beings copying out, reading aloud, up to cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom?”
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “it is because of the power of the buddhas that Māra the wicked one cannot hinder bodhisattva great beings copying out, reading aloud, explaining, reciting from memory, properly paying attention to, and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom. Śāriputra, it is the power of those lord buddhas—the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in all the ten directions. Those lord buddhas watch over those bodhisattva great beings and help. Māra the wicked one cannot hinder those bodhisattva great beings copying out, reading aloud, teaching, reciting from memory, properly paying attention to, and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom whom those lord buddhas watch over and help. And why? Śāriputra, it is because Māra the wicked one cannot hinder those bodhisattva great beings copying out, reading aloud, reciting from memory, explaining, properly paying attention to, and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom whom the buddhas have assisted. And why? Śāriputra, it is because it is in the nature of things  that infinite, countless tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in infinite, countless world systems in all the ten directions watch over those bodhisattva great beings copying out, reading aloud, reciting from memory, explaining, properly paying attention to, and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom. 
 “Śāriputra, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family copying out, reading aloud, reciting from memory, teaching, properly paying attention to, and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom should also know, ‘It is because of the power of the Buddha that I am copying out this deep perfection of wisdom, that I am reading it aloud, that I am reciting it from memory, that I am teaching it, that I am properly paying attention to it, and that I am cultivating it.’ ” 
 “Lord, are all those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family copying out, reading aloud, reciting from memory, teaching, cultivating, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom through the power of the buddhas? Have all been assisted by the Buddha?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Exactly so, Śāriputra, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “It is exactly as you say! You should know that any and all the sons of a good family or daughters of a good family copying out, reading aloud, clearly articulating, reciting from memory, teaching to others, properly paying attention to,  and cultivating this deep perfection of wisdom, Śāriputra, do so through the power of the Buddha. All have also been assisted by the Buddha.” 
 Śāriputra then asked, “Lord, do those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in infinite, countless world systems in all the ten directions know about those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family copying out, reading aloud, clearly articulating, reciting from memory, explaining, teaching, cultivating, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom?
 “Lord, do those lord buddhas see with the buddha eye and are they aware of those bodhisattva great beings copying out, reading aloud, clearly articulating, reciting from memory, explaining, teaching, cultivating, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom?”
 “Exactly so, Śāriputra, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “You should know that all those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in all the ten directions know about those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family copying out, reading aloud, clearly articulating, reciting from memory, explaining, teaching, cultivating, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom, as well as practicing it for suchness. Those lord buddhas see with the buddha eye and are aware of those bodhisattva great beings.
 “Śāriputra, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle are close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Śāriputra, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle  bearing this deep perfection of wisdom in mind are those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have come to have an abundance of belief in this deep perfection of wisdom and respect, revere, honor, and worship this deep perfection of wisdom with flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. 
 “Śāriputra, with the buddha eye the tathāgatas see those bodhisattva great beings, and also those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family. 
 “Śāriputra, great is the profit, great the benefit, great the result, and great the maturation for those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who write out this deep perfection of wisdom and bear it in mind. On account of that wholesome root they are never separated from the lord buddhas; they are never born in terrible forms of life; though born as gods and humans they are not separated from the buddhas and bodhisattvas; and also they step onto the irreversible level.
 “Śāriputra, on account of that wholesome root those bodhisattva great beings and those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family are never separated from the six perfections; they are never separated from inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; they are never separated from the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path; they are never separated from the ten tathāgata powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and they are never separated from the knowledge  of all aspects.
 “Śāriputra, with the passing away of the Tathāgata this perfection of wisdom will circulate in the southern region. There the monks and nuns, laymen and laywomen will write out, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom. On account of that wholesome root they will not blunder into terrible forms of life, they will experience everything perfect as gods and humans, and they will ennoble themselves with the six perfections; respect, revere, honor, and worship the lord buddhas; and gradually pass into complete nirvāṇa in the three vehicles—in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, or Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, or Great Vehicle.
 “Śāriputra, from the southern region this deep perfection of wisdom will circulate into the country of Vartani. There too the monks and nuns, laymen and laywomen will write out, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom and respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. On account of that wholesome root they will not blunder into terrible forms of life, they will experience everything perfect as gods and humans, and they will ennoble themselves with the six perfections, will worship the lord buddhas, and will gradually go forth in the three vehicles—the Śrāvaka Vehicle, Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and Great Vehicle. 
 “Śāriputra, from the country of Vartani this deep perfection of wisdom will circulate into the northern region. There too, Śāriputra, the monks and nuns, laymen and laywomen will write out, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom, and on account of that wholesome root they will not blunder into terrible forms of life, they will experience everything perfect as gods and humans, and they will ennoble themselves with the six perfections, will worship the lord buddhas, and will gradually go forth in the three vehicles—the Śrāvaka Vehicle, Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and Great Vehicle.
 “Therefore, Śāriputra, they do the work of the Buddha, this deep perfection of wisdom, at a time in the future, during the last of the ‘five hundreds.’ And why? Śāriputra, it is because when the Dharma and Vinaya have become the site, the good Dharma does not disappear.
 “Śāriputra, I watch over those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who write out, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom and practice it for suchness.
 “Śāriputra, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who write out this deep perfection of wisdom and, having copied it out, respect, revere, honor, and worship it with flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners—those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who do that, on account of that wholesome root will not blunder into terrible forms of life.  They will experience everything perfect as gods and humans, will ennoble themselves with the six perfections, and, having ennobled themselves, will respect, revere, honor, and worship the lord buddhas and will gradually go forth in the three vehicles—the Śrāvaka Vehicle, Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and Great Vehicle. And why? Śāriputra, it is because with the buddha eye the Tathāgata sees those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family, the Tathāgata praises them, and the Tathāgata extols them; all the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in all the vast world systems in all the ten directions also see those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family with the buddha eye and praise and glorify those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family.”
 “Lord, at a later time, during a later period, will this deep perfection of wisdom spread widely in the northern region?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Exactly so, Śāriputra, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Śāriputra, at a later time, at a later period, this deep perfection of wisdom will spread widely in the northern region. Śāriputra, there at a later time, during a later period, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will hear this deep perfection of wisdom and, having heard it, will write out, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom, and practice it for suchness. Those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who hear this deep perfection of wisdom, and, having heard it, take up, bear in mind,  read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom and practice it for suchness have long set out in the vehicle, have served many buddhas, and have planted wholesome roots sprung from the Tathāgata.”
 “Lord, at a later time, during a later period, how many sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the region to the north will there be who hear this deep perfection of wisdom and, having heard it, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom and practice it for suchness?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “at a later time, during a later period, there will be many bodhisattva great beings in the region to the north, but still there will not be many bodhisattva great beings or sons of a good family or daughters of a good family, Śāriputra, who will hear this deep perfection of wisdom and, having heard it, will write out, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom and practice it for suchness. Those bodhisattva great beings and sons of a good family and daughters of a good family, when they hear an exposition of this deep perfection of wisdom, will not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified. And why? Because those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will have followed after the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas and questioned them and made inquiries. And why? Because those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will have completed the perfection of wisdom, and similarly, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family  will have completed the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving; those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will have completed inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will have completed the applications of mindfulness; those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will have completed the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path; and those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will have completed the ten tathāgata powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha. Śāriputra, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family are firmly planted on wholesome roots and, taking unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening as their point of departure, will work for the welfare of many beings. 
 “And why? Śāriputra, it is because I have had conversations that concerned just the knowledge of all aspects with those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family; and those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas who were there in times gone by, those lord buddhas have also had conversations that concerned just the knowledge of all aspects with those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family as well, so, even after they have exchanged lives they again behave like this, namely, they take unsurpassed, complete awakening as their point of departure and have those sorts of conversations concerned with just the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Even Māra and the Māra class of gods cannot split those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family from  unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, so what need is there to say more about the others who forsake this deep perfection of wisdom, who admire wrongdoing, and who habitually do wrong not being able to split them? 
 “Śāriputra, when those bodhisattva great beings and sons of a good family and daughters of a good family hear this deep perfection of wisdom, they obtain immense joy from, and feel great delight in, the fact that many beings will be established on wholesome roots that have to do with unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family declare to me, face to face, ‘Lord, when we practice the practice of the perfection of wisdom we will establish many hundreds of creatures, many thousands of creatures, many hundreds of thousands of creatures in the wholesome dharmas; that is, taking unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening as our point of departure, we will establish them in awakening—we will teach them, inspire them to take it up, motivate them, and excite them about it, and we prophesy their irreversibility.’ And why? It is because the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas see in their hearts the thought those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle have—the thought to make that declaration, and rejoice—and I too, Śāriputra, have rejoiced, when those bodhisattva great beings are practicing for awakening, in their declaration, ‘We will teach many hundreds of creatures, many thousands of creatures, many hundreds of thousands of creatures unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. We will inspire them to take it up, motivate them, and excite them about it.  We will establish them in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ 
 “Also in the presence of past tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family have declared, ‘When we practice the practice of the perfection of wisdom we will establish many hundreds of creatures, many thousands of creatures, many hundreds of thousands of creatures in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—we will teach them, inspire them to take it up, motivate them, and excite them about it, and we prophesy their irreversibility.’ And why? Because the past tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas saw in their hearts the intention of those bodhisattva great beings and sons of a good family and daughters of a good family to make that declaration, and rejoiced. And I too, Śāriputra, have rejoiced, when those bodhisattva great beings are practicing for awakening, in their declaration, ‘We will teach many hundreds of creatures, many thousands of creatures, many hundreds of thousands of creatures unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—we will inspire them to take it up, motivate them, and excite them about it. We will establish them in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ 
 “Śāriputra, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family will have a greater admiration for form, sound, smell, taste, feeling, and dharmas, and they will give away greater gifts. Because of giving away greater gifts they will make  an occasion for greater wholesome roots. Because they have made an occasion for greater wholesome roots they will appropriate a greater maturation. Because they appropriate a greater maturation, from that maturation they will, for the welfare of just those beings, appropriate a greater maturation; they will give away everything inner and outer to just those beings; and on account of that wholesome root they will reach other buddhafields and come face to face with tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas wherever those buddhas are teaching the Dharma. In those buddhafields they will hear just this perfection of wisdom and again inspire many hundreds of creatures, many thousands of creatures, many hundreds of thousands of creatures to take up unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—they will teach it, motivate them, and excite them about it.” 
 “Lord,” said Śāriputra, “it is amazing that there is thus not any dharma the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha does not know, there is not any true nature of dharmas and suchness he does not know, there is not any Dharma teaching he does not know, and there is not any behavior of beings he does not know; and that he thus knows as well past bodhisattvas, knows as well past buddhafields; knows as well the śrāvakas of past tathāgatas; knows as well the bodhisattvas of future tathāgatas, knows as well the buddhafields and śrāvakas of future tathāgatas,  knows as well the bodhisattvas of present tathāgatas, knows as well the buddhafields and śrāvakas of present tathāgatas, knows as well the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in vast world systems in the ten directions, knows as well the bodhisattvas of those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, and knows as well their buddhafields and their śrāvakas.
 “Lord, when any bodhisattva great beings strive at these six perfections—those who seek and search for these six perfections, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who seek and search for these six perfections—some of them seek and find these six perfections, and some of them seek and do not find these six perfections.”
 “It is not so, Śāriputra, it is not so,” said the Lord. “In general, all the sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who do not give up striving find these six perfections. And why? Śāriputra, it is because those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family are striving at these six perfections.”
 “Lord, will those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family find these deep sūtras connected with the six perfections?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who, without any concern for body and life, strive for the six perfections with a burning desire to practice and with great faith do find them.  And why? Śāriputra, it is because it happens like that for those who mature beings for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—who teach it, inspire them to take it up, motivate them, excite them, cause them to enter into it, and establish them in it. Śāriputra, even after those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family have exchanged lives they find these six perfections, they practice these six perfections as they have been expounded, and they persevere without letting up until they have purified the buddhafields, until they have brought beings to maturity, and until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
This was the thirty-ninth chapter, “The Northern Region,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 40: The Work of Māra
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, in light of these pronouncements you have made about the good qualities that accrue to those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and who are practicing the six perfections, bringing beings to maturity, and taking possession of a buddhafield, what sorts of hindrances can those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family expect to face?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “when it takes a really long time to have the confidence giving a readiness to speak, bodhisattva great beings should know it is the work of Māra.”
 “Why should bodhisattva great beings know it is the work of Māra if it takes  a really long time to have the confidence giving a readiness to speak?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Here if it is very hard for bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to complete the perfection of wisdom, if it is very hard for them to complete the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving—Subhūti, if it takes a really long time to have the confidence giving a readiness to speak, in that case, Subhūti, from this one of many explanations, bodhisattva great beings should know it is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the confidence giving a readiness to speak happens too fast, bodhisattva great beings should know that this, too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.”
 “Why should bodhisattva great beings know that it is the work of Māra when the confidence giving a readiness to speak happens too fast?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “Here it is when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of giving, and are practicing the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom, Subhūti, and the confidence giving a readiness to speak happens too fast. Subhūti, from this one of many explanations, bodhisattva great beings should know that this is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know of yawning while writing out the perfection of wisdom that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know of laughing while writing out the perfection of wisdom that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know of laughing at each other while writing out the perfection of wisdom that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore,  Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know of sneering at each other while writing out the perfection of wisdom that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know of mental distraction while writing out the perfection of wisdom that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that if they harmonize their thoughts with each other while writing it out that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know of thinking, ‘I find no enjoyment in this,’ that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that if they yawn, get up from their seat, and leave, this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that if they yawn while reciting it, or taking it up, or teaching it, or yawn while paying attention to it, this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that laughing at each other while taking up, bearing in mind, reading aloud, and mastering—or laughing at each other while properly paying attention to—this perfection of wisdom is also, Subhūti, the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know of sneering at each other while taking it up, bearing it in mind, reading it aloud, mastering it, and properly paying attention to it, that this also, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings  should know that mental distraction while taking it up, bearing it in mind, reading it aloud, mastering it, teaching it, and properly paying attention to it is also, Subhūti, the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that if they harmonize their thoughts with each other while taking it up, bearing it in mind, reading it aloud, mastering it, teaching it, and properly paying attention to it, this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti inquired further of him, “Lord, you have said, ‘Bodhisattva great beings should know that getting up from their seats and leaving with the thought “I find no enjoyment in this” is also the work of Māra.’ Why do they find no enjoyment in it?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “it is because those bodhisattva great beings have not practiced the perfection of wisdom before; have not practiced the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, or perfection of morality before; and, Subhūti, it is because they have not practiced the perfection of giving before. Subhūti, because of that they find no enjoyment in an exposition of this deep perfection of wisdom and get up from their seats and leave.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when those bodhisattva great beings think, ‘We have not been prophesied in this perfection of wisdom,’ they lose their faith in it, get up from their seats, and leave. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.”
 “Lord, why do those who are not prophesied  in the perfection of wisdom get up from their seats and leave?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is not prophesied of bodhisattva great beings who have not entered into flawlessness.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that when they lose their faith, get up from their seats, and leave, thinking, ‘Our names are not given in this perfection of wisdom,’ this too is the work of Māra.”
 “Lord, why are the names of bodhisattva great beings not announced in this deep perfection of wisdom?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the Tathāgata does not announce the names of bodhisattva great beings who have not been prophesied. They think, ‘My name, and the settlement, or village, or market town in which I was born are not given here.’ They do not think, ‘I am going to listen to the perfection of wisdom.’ They think, ‘I have to leave the circle,’ and as many thoughts as they have to leave, they appropriate that many eons of practice. They reject this perfection of wisdom and they think, ‘I have to practice the yoga in other sūtras—the ones that do not bring about the knowledge of all aspects—and I have to master those.’ Thus those bodhisattvas and sons of a good family and daughters of a good family would reject the root of the tree of the knowledge of all aspects and think instead to take the branches, petals, and leaves as supports. So, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.”
 “Lord, what are the sūtras that do not bring about the knowledge of all aspects,  the sūtras they think they have to master?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “they are the sūtras connected with those in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, that is, those only explaining the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and paths, and the emptiness, signless, and wishless gateways to liberation, standing in which sons of a good family and daughters of a good family reach the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the result of a worthy one. Subhūti, they are the sūtras connected with the Śrāvaka Vehicle. They are the ones that do not bring about the knowledge of all aspects they still think they have to master, even after having rejected this perfection of wisdom. And why? Subhūti, it is because bodhisattva great beings who have issued forth from the perfection of wisdom have issued forth because of ordinary and extraordinary dharmas. Subhūti, it is because when bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom, they also train in all ordinary and extraordinary dharmas as well.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, a dog might spurn a bowlful of food from an owner with the thought to get a mouthful of food from a servant. Similarly, Subhūti, at a future time there will be sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle who reject this deep perfection of wisdom and think they have to master sūtras connected with the Śrāvaka Vehicle and the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, at a future time there will be sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle  who reject this deep perfection of wisdom and think they have to master sūtras connected with the Śrāvaka Vehicle and the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle for wealth and respect. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, somebody might seek an elephant, find the elephant, and still think they have to track the elephant. What do you think, Subhūti, is that a person gifted with intelligence?”
 “No, Lord,” said Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “you should know that at a future time those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who reject this deep perfection of wisdom and think that they have to master those sūtras connected with the Śrāvaka Vehicle and the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle are like that. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Further, Subhūti, somebody might want to see an ocean, then see the ocean, and still think, ‘I have to go looking for the water in the hoofprint left by a bull.’ They might look at the water in the hoofprint and think, ‘Is this not just the amount of water there is in the ocean?’ What do you think, Subhūti, is that a person gifted with intelligence?”
 “No, Lord,” said Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “you should know that at a future time those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle who, having heard or found this deep perfection of wisdom, reject it and think they have to take up those sūtras connected with the Śrāvaka Vehicle and the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle are like that. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings  should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a contractor or contractor’s apprentice might want to build a palace on the scale of the Vaijayanta palace but might think that they have to take the circles of the sun and the moon as the scale. What do you think, Subhūti, is that man who has examined the Vaijayanta palace and wants to build a palace on the scale of the Vaijayanta, taking the celestial mansion circles of the sun and the moon as the scale, a person gifted with intelligence?”
 “No, Lord,” said Subhūti.
 “It is similar, Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “with some of those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who will be there at a future time, and who, having heard or found this deep perfection of wisdom, reject and discard it, thinking they have to seek the knowledge of all aspects in the sūtras connected with the Śrāvaka Vehicle and the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle. What do you think, Subhūti, are those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle persons gifted with intelligence?”
 “No, Lord,” said Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Further, Subhūti, somebody might want to see a wheel-turning emperor. Having seen a commander of a fort they might think, ‘The color and form of a wheel-turning emperor must be just the same sort as those of this commander of a fort.’ Having grasped the color, shape, dress, signs, and tokens of the commander of a fort, they then say, ‘The distinguishing color, shape, dress, signs, and tokens of a wheel-turning emperor  are like these.’ What do you think, Subhūti, is that person gifted with intelligence?”
 “No, Lord,” said Subhūti.
 “It is similar, Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “with those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle who will be there at a future time, and who, having heard or found this deep perfection of wisdom, reject and discard it, thinking they have to seek and master the knowledge of all aspects in the sūtras connected with the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles. What do you think, Subhūti, are those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle persons gifted with intelligence?”
 “No, Lord,” said Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family write out this deep perfection of wisdom they are disturbed, and, while writing, frequently become confident in their readiness to speak—confident, that is, to speak about a form, and confident in their readiness to speak about a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas; confident in their readiness to speak about the perfection of giving, and confident in their readiness to speak about the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom; confident in their readiness to speak about the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm; confident in their readiness to speak about clear articulation and recitation, and confident in their readiness to speak about what has to be taught to students; confident in their readiness to speak about the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and paths; confident in their readiness to speak about all the concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions;  confident in their readiness to speak about inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; confident in their readiness to speak about the powers, and confident in their readiness to speak about the fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha; up to and confident in their readiness to speak about unsurpassed, complete awakening. 
 “And why? Subhūti, it is because the perfection of wisdom does not give confidence giving a readiness to speak—because, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is inconceivable; because, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is without production and without cessation; because, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is without defilement and without purification; because, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is without distraction; because, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is not something that can be spoken out loud; because, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is not part of a conversation; because, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is not something that can be talked about; and because, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended. And why? Subhūti, it is because all the dharmas do not exist in this deep perfection of wisdom. 
 “Subhūti, if, when those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family write out this deep perfection of wisdom, they are distracted by those dharmas, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.”
 “Lord, is it possible to write out the perfection of wisdom?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti, it is not possible,” replied the Lord. “And why? Subhūti, it is because the perfection of wisdom has no intrinsic nature; the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection  of giving have no intrinsic nature; all the emptinesses, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha have no intrinsic nature; and the knowledge of all aspects has no intrinsic nature. That which has no intrinsic nature does not exist and the perfection of wisdom is something that does not exist, so, what does not exist cannot write out what does not exist. 
 “Subhūti, if those certain sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle form the notion ‘this deep perfection of wisdom is not an existent thing,’ Subhūti, they should know that this too is the work of Māra.”
 Subhūti said, “Lord, when those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle who write out this deep perfection of wisdom in written letters think, ‘I have written out this deep perfection of wisdom,’ and settle down on this deep perfection of wisdom as the letters, Lord, they should know that this too is the work of Māra. And why? Lord, it is because the perfection of wisdom is without letters, and the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving are without letters; Lord, form is without letters, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are without letters; the constituents are without letters and the sense fields too are without letters; the deliverances are without letters;  the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are without letters; the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha are without letters; and the knowledge of all aspects is without letters as well. 
 “Lord, if those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle settle down thinking, ‘This deep perfection of wisdom is without letters’; and similarly, settle down thinking, ‘The perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving and without letters’; and similarly, settle down thinking, ‘The thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the gateways to liberation, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the distinct attributes of a buddha are without letters’; and, Lord, if bodhisattva great beings settle down thinking, ‘The knowledge of all aspects is without letters as well,’ Lord, they should know that this too is the work of Māra.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so,” said the Lord. “They should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattvas, sons of a good family, and daughters of a good family write out this deep perfection of wisdom, if their imagination turns to the city, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle write out this deep perfection of wisdom  and get caught up thinking about a settlement, get caught up thinking about a town, get caught up thinking about a king’s palace, get caught up thinking about a country, get caught up thinking about gurus and teachers, get caught up thinking about their parents, brothers, sisters, kinsmen, and blood relatives, get caught up thinking about thieves, get caught up in thoughts connected with savages, get caught up in thoughts imagining being in society and being with courtesans, or get caught up thinking about other things, because Māra the wicked one will interrupt them with hindrances and distractions when they clearly articulate this deep perfection of wisdom, read it aloud, and properly pay attention to it, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that these too are the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, sons of a good family and daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle writing out this deep perfection of wisdom get wealth and respect, verses of praise, and requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses. When bodhisattvas, sons of a good family, and daughters of a good family are relishing this experience, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know when they write out, clearly articulate, read aloud, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom, that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings are writing out, clearly articulating, reading aloud, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom and Māra the wicked one supplies deep sūtras, there bodhisattva great beings with skillful means should not get excited about those deep sūtras that Māra supplies. And why? Subhūti, it is because those sūtras do not bring about  the knowledge of all aspects. Subhūti, there bodhisattva great beings without skillful means, having heard this deep perfection of wisdom, will reject it, even though in it I have taught skillful means for bodhisattva great beings in detail, and it is in just this deep perfection of wisdom that they should search for a detailed description of skillful means. 
 “Subhūti, when sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Great Vehicle, having rejected this deep perfection of wisdom, decide to seek for skillful means in those sūtras connected with the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.”
This was the fortieth chapter, “The Work of Māra,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 41: Not Complete Because of Māra 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener wants to listen to the perfection of wisdom, to write it out, take it up, clearly articulate it, recite it, and read it out loud, and the Dharma preacher has become too lazy, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher has not become too lazy to write out this deep perfection of wisdom, to take it up, clearly articulate it, and recite it, but the Dharma listener has gone off to some other place, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener wants to write out the perfection of wisdom, wants to clearly articulate it, and wants to recite it, but the Dharma preacher has gone off to some other place, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher longs for wealth, respect, and verses of praise, and is greedy for requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—while  the Dharma listener is not needy, and is contented, energetic, mindful, collected, focused, and intelligent, then too, Subhūti, everything for the perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher is not needy, is contented, lives in solitude, and is energetic, mindful, collected, focused, and intelligent, while the Dharma listener is very needy, wants to do wrong, longs for wealth, respect, and verses of praise, and is greedy for requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, transmitting, reciting, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher is a jungle dweller, an alms-food eater, a refuse-rags wearer, a later-food refuser, a single-sitter, one satisfied with whatever alms they get, a cemetery dweller, an open-air dweller, a tree-root dweller, one who sleeps sitting up, a natural-bed user, and a three-robe wearer, and the Dharma listener does not believe in being a jungle dweller, up to a three-robe wearer, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, and reciting this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener is a jungle dweller, up to a three-robe wearer, and the Dharma preacher is not a jungle dweller, up to a three-robe wearer,  then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listeners have faith and a virtuous character, want to write out this deep perfection of wisdom, want to take it up, want to clearly articulate it, and want to recite it, while the Dharma preacher does not have faith, wants unwholesome dharmas, does not want to write out and give this deep perfection of wisdom, and does not want to grasp the body of meanings, bodhisattva great beings should know that this is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher gives up all personal possessions with no thought to hold back, and the Dharma listener is stingy and very needy, wants to do wrong, longs for wealth, respect, and verses of praise, and longs for requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener gives up all personal possessions with no thought to hold back, and the Dharma preacher is stingy and miserly, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore,  Subhūti, when the Dharma listener wants to give away the requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—to the Dharma preacher but the Dharma preacher does not want to accept them, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, reciting, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher understands just from headings, but the Dharma listener needs to be led, understands from a detailed explanation, and responds well to words, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, transmitting, reciting, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener understands just from headings, but the Dharma preacher needs to be led, understands from a detailed explanation, and responds well to words, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher knows the different features of the discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, verses, summaries, tales, introductions, accounts, birth stories, expanded texts, marvels, and expositions, and the Dharma listener does not know the different features of the discourses, melodious narrations,  predictions, verses, summaries, tales, introductions, accounts, birth stories, expanded texts, marvels, and expositions, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher is endowed with the six perfections but the Dharma listener is not endowed with the six perfections, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, reading aloud, reciting from memory, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener is endowed with the six perfections but the Dharma preacher is not endowed with them, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher is skillful at the six perfections but the Dharma listener is not skillful at them, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, reading aloud, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener is skillful at the six perfections  but the Dharma preacher is not skillful at them, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher has obtained the dhāraṇīs but the Dharma listener has not obtained the dhāraṇīs, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher wants to write it out, up to wants to properly pay attention to it, but the Dharma listener does not want to write it out, up to does not want to properly pay attention to it, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, reading aloud, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener wants to write it out, up to wants to properly pay attention to it, but the Dharma preacher does not want to write it out, up to does not want to properly pay attention to it, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher is free from the greed that causes them to act on the desire for sense gratification, or from malice, drowsiness, dozing, gross mental excitement, uneasiness, or doubt, and the Dharma listener is not free from the greed that causes them to act on the desire for sense gratification, or from malice, drowsiness, dozing, gross mental excitement, uneasiness, or doubt,  then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener is free from the greed that causes them to act on the desire for sense gratification, or from malice, drowsiness, dozing, gross mental excitement, uneasiness, or doubt, and the Dharma preacher is not free from obscuration, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when they are writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom and someone comes up to them and tells them what is awful about the hells, and tells them what is awful about the animal world, the world of Yama, and the world of ghosts, saying, ‘Those in the hells have such suffering, those in the animal worlds have such suffering, and those in the world of ghosts have such suffering. You should put an end to suffering right here. What will fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening do for you?’ then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great being should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when they are writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom someone comes up to them and speaks in praise of the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to speaks in praise of the gods in the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana,  saying, ‘The desire realm is such a pleasure because of the enjoyment of sense objects; the form realm is such a pleasure because of the concentrations and absorptions; the formless realm is such a pleasure because of the quiet calm and absorptions. And yet they are all impermanent, suffering, unowned, subject to change, subject to extinction, unattractive, and subject to cessation, so you should obtain the result of stream enterer, or you should obtain the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening right here, or else you will be in a cycle of cyclic existences for a long time,’ bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher is a loner without companions who does things personally, while the Dharma listener is gregarious, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, reading aloud, reciting, and meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener is a loner without companions who does things personally, while the Dharma preacher is gregarious, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher says, ‘I will give this perfection of wisdom to those who follow after me to write out, up to and properly  pay attention to,’ and the Dharma listener does not follow, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener wants to follow after the Dharma preacher but the Dharma preacher provides no opportunity for following, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, explaining, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when for the sake of some trifling material possession the Dharma preacher wants to give this deep perfection of wisdom to write out, clearly articulate, recite, up to meditate on, and, on account of some trifling material possession the Dharma listener is not willing to approach, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, properly paying attention to, and meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher wants to go to a location where there is a life-threatening danger and the Dharma listener does not want to go there, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener wants to go to a location where there is a life-threatening danger and the Dharma preacher does not want to go there,  then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma listener wants to go where food is scarce and water is scarce and the Dharma preacher does not want to go there, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher wants to go where there is no food and there is no water and the Dharma listener does not want to go there, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when the Dharma preacher wants to go where there is ample food and plenty of water and the Dharma listeners have followed, and the Dharma preacher then says to them, ‘Sons of a good family, it would not be right, would it, if you have come here for the sake of material possessions? Think about this carefully for a moment or else you might, on account of the amount of alms you might actually get, come to feel regret,’ then that Dharma preacher in a subtle way will have rejected them. And if, disgusted, they decide, ‘This is a sign of rejection, it is not a sign of generosity,’ then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when a Dharma preacher who is a monk wants to go into a dangerous forest, wild jungle, or steep ravine where there is danger from robbers, danger from savages, danger from hunters, danger from angry wild animals, and danger from poisonous snakes, but still the Dharma listeners who want to listen to this deep perfection of wisdom follow the Dharma preacher, yet the Dharma preacher who is a monk says to them, ‘Sons of a good family,  it is not right, is it, that you have to come here to this dangerous forest, wild jungle, where there is danger from robbers,’ then, because that Dharma preacher who is a monk still does not want to explain, does not want to write out, does not want to clearly articulate, does not want to cause them to listen to, and does not want to cause them to meditate on this deep perfection of wisdom, they become disgusted after hearing that from the Dharma preacher who is a monk and do not go where that Dharma preacher who is a monk goes, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when a Dharma preacher who is a monk gets attached to a generous alms-giving family, and, attached to the generous alms-giving family, continually thinks about going to see that family, and, continually thinking about them, goes to see that family and therefore rejects Dharma listeners, saying, ‘Venerables, I have to go to see and visit the generous alms-giving families,’ the Dharma preacher rejects those Dharma listeners. When they, rejected, turn back, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a monk and disguised in the form of a tathāgata employs whatever means possible so that no matter who it is, they will not write out, will not take up, will not bear in mind, will not recite, will not master, will not properly pay attention to, and will not meditate on this deep perfection of wisdom.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then asked him,  “Lord, why does Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a monk employ whatever means possible so that no matter who it is, they will not write out, will not clearly articulate, will not read aloud, will not recite, will not properly pay attention to, and will not meditate on this deep perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a monk causes a split and separation, saying, ‘This is not the perfection of wisdom. The perfection of wisdom is the sūtra that has come down to me, which I have mastered.’ Subhūti, there, when Māra the wicked one thus causes a split, those bodhisattvas who have not been prophesied begin to harbor doubt, and those who have harbored doubt do not write out, do not clearly articulate, do not master, do not recite from memory, do not properly pay attention to, and do not meditate on this deep perfection of wisdom. Then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, mastering, reciting, meditating on, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a monk comes up to a bodhisattva great being and says, ‘A bodhisattva who practices this deep perfection of wisdom actualizes the very limit of reality and reaches the result of stream enterer, or reaches the result of once-returner, or reaches the result of non-returner, or reaches the state of a worthy one, or reaches the state of a pratyekabuddha,’ then too, Subhūti,  everything for writing out, expounding, teaching, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete and bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, there are many works of Māra that act as hindrances to writing out, expounding, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattvas should know those works of Māra, and knowing them, should eliminate them as well.”
 “Lord, what are those works of Māra that bodhisattva great beings should know, and knowing them, should eliminate as well?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “works of Māra arise with counterfeit perfections of wisdom, and similarly, works of Māra arise with counterfeit perfections of concentration, perseverance, patience, morality, and giving. Bodhisattva great beings should know and eliminate them. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, works of Māra also arise with counterfeit inner emptiness, up to arise with counterfeit emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and works of Māra arise with a counterfeit Śrāvaka Vehicle and Pratyekabuddha Vehicle as well. Bodhisattva great beings should know and eliminate them. And that counterfeit perfection of wisdom says, ‘Cultivate these four applications of mindfulness; cultivate these right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path; and cultivate these emptiness, signless, and wishless gateways to liberation. Master them,  and having mastered them reach the result of stream enterer, or reach the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one right here. What use is there in fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’ Then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, taking up, teaching, clearly articulating, properly paying attention to, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete, and works such as these of Māra the wicked one start to pose a threat. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a buddha with a halo the length of two outstretched arms extending out around his body, gold-like in color, approaches bodhisattvas. When, on seeing him, they experience a feeling of delight, and having experienced that feeling of delight they neglect the knowledge of all aspects, then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, expounding, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete. Bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one makes visible a buddha and so on at the head of the monastic saṅgha in front of those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family, and the bodhisattvas experience a longing for that, thinking, ‘In future I too must become such a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha. Similarly, I must gather a retinue and I too must teach the Dharma just like that tathāgata teaches it.’ When they experience a longing for that they neglect the knowledge of all aspects. Then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly  articulating, mastering, expounding, paying attention to, and meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete. Bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one makes visible many hundreds of bodhisattvas, many thousands of bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of giving and practicing the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom. When those bodhisattvas experience a longing for those magical productions of Māra they neglect the knowledge of all aspects. Then too, Subhūti, everything for writing out, clearly articulating, reciting, expounding, paying attention to, and meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom is not complete. Bodhisattva great beings should know that this too, Subhūti, is the work of Māra. And why? Subhūti, it is because form does not exist in this deep perfection of wisdom, and neither does feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; the constituents and sense fields do not exist; and the perfections, thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, gateways to liberation, and awakening do not exist. And, Subhūti, where form does not exist, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do not exist; up to awakening does not exist; where awakening does not exist a buddha  does not exist there either, and neither do bodhisattvas or śrāvakas exist. And why? Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are empty of their own intrinsic nature. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when sons of a good family and daughters of a good family are writing out, reading aloud, clearly articulating, mastering, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom, they encounter many hindrances to this perfection of wisdom. To illustrate, Subhūti, as many precious things as there are in the world—namely, gold, jewels, pearls, sapphires, beryl, conch shells, crystals, corals, and silver—they occasion many hindrances and many opponents. Similarly, Subhūti, when sons of a good family and daughters of a good family write out, read aloud, clearly articulate, master, explain, properly pay attention to, and meditate on this deep perfection of wisdom, it occasions many hindrances and many opponents.”
 “Exactly so, Lord, exactly so,” said Subhūti. “Sūtras connected with the perfection of wisdom occasion many opponents and many hindrances. Ignorant persons possessed by Māra hinder those writing out, clearly articulating, reading aloud, reciting, and properly paying attention to the deep perfection of wisdom. Lord, those ignorant, narrow-minded simpletons hinder those writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom, and those who do not write out this deep perfection of wisdom, or who hinder those writing it out do not have the intellect to advance toward the vast buddhadharmas.  Those who do not write out this deep perfection of wisdom, or who hinder those writing it, who do not meditate on it, or who hinder those meditating on it, do not have the intellect to advance toward the vast buddhadharmas.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so,” said the Lord. “Those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who do not write out, read aloud, clearly articulate, recite from memory, properly pay attention to, and meditate on this deep perfection of wisdom, causing hindrances to it, have newly set out in the vehicle, have not produced wholesome roots, have stunted wholesome roots, have not served well the victors of the past, and have not been assisted by spiritual friends. Subhūti, those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who do not write out, up to meditate on this deep perfection of wisdom, who hinder others from writing it out, up to meditating on it are narrow-minded simpletons with stunted intellects, so they do not have the intellect to advance toward the vast buddhadharmas.
 “There are also other works of Māra like that, Subhūti, that hinder writing out, up to meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom. But still, Subhūti, they should know that even if there are works of Māra that act as hindrances to those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family writing out, reciting, properly paying attention to, and meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom, Subhūti, they still, through the force of the buddha, keep on completing the perfection of concentration more and more; completing the perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving;  completing the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; and completing the gateways to liberation, powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, distinct attributes of a buddha, up to the knowledge of all aspects. Because of that those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family do not encounter hindrances when they write out, read aloud, clearly articulate, meditate on, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom, continuing to complete more and more all the perfections, and complete all the dharmas on the side of awakening, all the gateways to liberation, the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, and the five clairvoyances. Those lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in the ten directions also make an effort for the sake of those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family writing out, reading aloud, clearly articulating, reciting from memory, and properly paying attention to this deep perfection of wisdom. And those bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening standing in the ten directions also make an effort to look after those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family writing out, reading aloud, clearly articulating, reciting from memory, properly paying attention to, and meditating on this deep perfection of wisdom as well.”
This was the forty-first chapter, “Not Complete Because of Māra,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 42: Revealing the World
“To illustrate, Subhūti, there might be  five, or ten, or twenty, or thirty, or forty, or fifty, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred thousand sons of a certain woman and all of them would make an effort, thinking, ‘What can we do so that our mother who gave birth to us, gave us the bodies we have and gave us life, does not fall sick; what can we do so that our mother is not in danger; what can we do so that our mother lives for a long time; what can we do so that our mother is not physically uncomfortable?’ Serving their mother with the finest service, protecting her with the finest protection, those sons think, ‘She must not face danger to her life or grow physically weak; or be attacked by mosquitos, black flies, or poisonous crawling creatures; or suffer from cold or heat, hunger or thirst.’ Thus, those sons attend on their mother with all the requirements for happiness; thus they serve their mother, thinking, ‘She reveals this world to us.’ 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas constantly and always watch over this deep perfection of wisdom with their buddha eye. And why? Because this deep perfection of wisdom gives birth to all the buddhadharmas; it causes the light of knowledge to shine. Also, those buddhas standing in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River constantly and always watch over this deep perfection of wisdom with their buddha eye. And why? Because this deep perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and perfectly reveals the knowledge of a knower of all. Therefore, those tathāgatas constantly and always watch over this deep perfection of wisdom with their buddha eye. And why? Because the perfection of concentration,  perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving of the tathāgatas issues forth from her; also inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature of the tathāgatas issues forth from her; also the four applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and paths issue forth from her; also the gateways to liberation, ten powers, four fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and distinct attributes of a buddha issue forth from her; up to also the knowledge of all aspects of all buddhas issues forth from her; and also stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, buddhas, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas issue forth from her.
 “Subhūti, it is also thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom that all those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, whoever they are, who have fully awakened, are fully awakening, and will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening have fully awakened, are fully awakening, and will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Subhūti, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas also constantly and always look out with their buddha eye for all those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who have set out in the Great Vehicle and are writing out, reading aloud, clearly articulating, and properly paying attention to this deep  perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas also constantly and always guard, protect, and keep safe those bodhisattva great beings, and sons of a good family and daughters of a good family so that one way or the other they will not abandon unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Subhūti said, “Lord, you have said, ‘The perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas and reveals this world.’ How, then, does the perfection of wisdom give birth to those bodhisattva great beings and buddhas, and how, Lord, does the perfection of wisdom reveal this world? How, Lord, is a tathāgata born from the perfection of wisdom, and what is this world of which the Tathāgata has spoken?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “this deep perfection of wisdom gives birth to a tathāgata’s ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and knowledge of all aspects, and it is on account of those, Subhūti, that a tathāgata comes to be known as a tathāgata. Therefore, Subhūti, this deep perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas.”
 “And what, Lord, has the Tathāgata said is the world?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti, the Tathāgata has said that the five aggregates are the world,” replied the Lord. 
 “Lord, how does the perfection of wisdom reveal the five aggregates?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom does not reveal those five aggregates as being destroyed, nor does it reveal them as being really destroyed. It does not reveal them as being produced. It does not reveal them as defilement. It does not reveal them as purification. It does not reveal them as increasing. It does not reveal them as declining. It does not reveal past, future, or present dharmas. And why? Because emptiness does not mean being destroyed, nor does it mean being really destroyed; because signlessness . . . , and wishlessness is not being destroyed, nor is it being really destroyed; because not occasioning anything . . . , not being produced . . . , not stopping . . . , being nonexistent . . . , and having no intrinsic nature is not being destroyed, nor is it being really destroyed. It is thus, Subhūti, that this deep perfection of wisdom is said to reveal the world. 
 “Subhūti, the tathāgatas know the infinite, countless thought activities of beings without measure, and know them thanks to the perfection of wisdom, but still, Subhūti, in this deep perfection of wisdom a being and the designation of a being are not apprehended. Form and the designation of form are not apprehended; feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness and the designation of consciousness are not apprehended. The eyes, eye consciousness, and eye contact are not apprehended, and the designation of eye contact is not apprehended; the ears and a sound . . . ; a nose and a smell . . . ; a tongue and a taste . . . ; a body and a feeling . . . ; and a thinking mind, dharmas, thinking-mind consciousness, and thinking-mind contact are not apprehended, and the designation of thinking-mind contact is not apprehended. The perfections . . . , the thirty-seven dharmas  on the side of awakening . . . , the gateways to liberation . . . , the powers . . . , the fearlessnesses . . . , the detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , up to the distinct attributes of a buddha . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects is not apprehended, and the designation of the knowledge of all aspects is not apprehended. It is thus, Subhūti, that this deep perfection of wisdom reveals the world to the tathāgatas. 
 “And why? Because, Subhūti, if even this very perfection of wisdom does not exist and is not apprehended in this deep perfection of wisdom, how could form, feeling, perception, and volitional factors ever be apprehended; how could consciousness ever be apprehended; up to how could the knowledge of all aspects ever be apprehended?
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas know for what they are the collected thoughts and distracted thoughts of as many beings designated with the designation being as there are, be they material or immaterial, with perception or without perception, or with neither perception nor nonperception, who are in this world or in other vast world systems in the ten directions. And why, Subhūti, do the tathāgatas know for what they are those collected thoughts and distracted thoughts of those beings? Subhūti, the tathāgatas know those collected thoughts and distracted thoughts of those beings for what they are through the true nature of dharmas.”
 “Lord, what is this true nature of dharmas such that the tathāgatas know for what they are those collected thoughts and distracted thoughts of those beings?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “it is that true nature of dharmas in which even the very true nature of dharmas is not apprehended, let alone collected thoughts  or distracted thoughts. So, Subhūti, the tathāgatas know for what they are those collected thoughts and distracted thoughts of those beings through that true nature of dharmas. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas know those collected thoughts and distracted thoughts of those beings for what they are, as inexhaustible. And how, Subhūti, do they know collected thoughts and distracted thoughts for what they are, as inexhaustible? Subhūti, here the tathāgatas know those minds of those beings for what they are, as free from greed, as cessation, and as abandonment. It is thus, Subhūti, that the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas know those collected thoughts and distracted thoughts of those beings for what they are, as isolated.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas know a greedy thought of those beings for what it is, a greedy thought. They know a mind free from greed for what it is, a mind free from greed. Similarly, they know a mind with hate and free from hate, and one with confusion and free from confusion.”
 “Lord,” asked Subhūti, “how do the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas know a greedy thought of those beings for what it is, a greedy thought; know a mind free from greed for what it is, a mind free from greed;  and similarly, know, for what it is, a mind with hate and free from hate, and one with confusion and free from confusion?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “a mind that is greedy is not as it really is. And why? Because, Subhūti, if even mind and mental factor dharmas are not apprehended as they really are, what need is there to say more about those with greed and free from greed, or with hate and free from hate, or with confusion and free from confusion? . . . . And, Subhūti, a mind with confusion is not as it really is. And why? Because, Subhūti, if even mind and mental factor dharmas are not apprehended as they really are, what need is there to say more about a mind free from confusion? It is thus, Subhūti, that the tathāgatas, thanks to the perfection of wisdom, know a greedy mind for what it is, a greedy mind; and similarly knows, for what it is, a mind free from greed . . . , a mind with hate and free from hate . . . , and one with confusion . . . , and one free from confusion for what it is, a mind free from confusion. 
 “Subhūti, how do the tathāgatas know a mind of beings free from greed for what it is, a mind free from greed? Subhūti, a mind that has greediness is not a mind that is free from greediness. And why? Because, Subhūti, two thoughts do not meet together. Therefore, Subhūti, a mind that is free from greediness is not a greedy mind. Similarly, a mind that is free from hatred  is not a mind with hate . . . . And a mind that is free from a confused state is not a mind with confusion. And why? Because, Subhūti, two thoughts do not come together. Therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas know a mind of those beings free from confusion for what it is, a mind free from confusion.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas know an inclusive thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, an inclusive thought. Subhūti, how do the tathāgatas know an inclusive thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, an inclusive thought? Subhūti, here the tathāgatas know that a thought of other beings or other persons is not inclusive, that a thought is not constricted, that a thought does not increase, that a thought is not reduced, that a thought does not come, and that a thought does not go. And why? Subhuti, it is because no intrinsic nature is apprehended which might make it inclusive, up to come and go. Therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know an inclusive thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, an inclusive thought.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom  the tathāgatas know a great thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, a thought that has become great. Furthermore, Subhūti, how do the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know a thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, a thought that has become great? Subhūti, here the tathāgatas do not view the intrinsic nature of a thought of other beings or other persons as coming, going, being stationary, being produced, stopping, or as lasting and then changing into something else. And why? Subhuti, it is because an intrinsic nature that comes or goes, or arises or stops, or lasts or lasts and then changes into something else does not exist. Therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know a thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, a thought that has become great.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas know an immeasurable thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, an immeasurable thought. Furthermore, Subhūti, how do the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know an immeasurable thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, an immeasurable thought? Subhūti, here the tathāgatas view that thought of other beings or other persons as not there, as not not there, as not fixed, and as not not fixed. And why? Subhūti, it is because streams of thought are without outflows and immeasurable, because a foundation on which they might persist does not exist. Therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know an immeasurable thought of other beings  or other persons for what it is, an immeasurable thought. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas know a thought of other beings or other persons that does not show itself for what it is, a thought that does not show itself. Subhūti, how do the tathāgatas know a thought of other beings or other persons that does not show itself for what it is, a thought that does not show itself? Subhūti, here, because it is empty of its own mark, the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, view that thought of other beings or other persons as without a mark and separated from an intrinsic nature. Therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know that thought of other beings or other persons that does not show itself for what it is, a thought that does not show itself.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas know an invisible thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, an invisible thought. Subhūti, how do the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know an invisible thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, an invisible thought? Subhūti, here, those thoughts of others are not even visible to the five eyes of a tathāgata; therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know an invisible thought of other beings or other persons for what it is, an invisible thought. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti,  thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas know the thoughts of other beings or other persons that have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded for what they are, thoughts that have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded. Subhūti, how do the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know the thoughts of other beings or other persons that have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded for what they are, thoughts that have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded? Subhūti, here, the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know those thoughts of other beings or other persons as follows. When the thoughts of beings who have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded arise, whichever of them arises they all arise based on form, or based on feeling, or based on perception, or based on volitional factors, or based on consciousness. Therefore, Subhūti, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas know the thoughts of other beings or other persons that have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded for what they are. 
 “ ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world are permanent”—is true, the others are false’  refers to form. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world are impermanent . . . both permanent and impermanent . . . neither permanent nor impermanent”—is true, the others are false’ refers to form. Connect this in the same way also with feeling, perception, and volitional factors. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world are permanent”—is true, the others are false’ refers to consciousness. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world are impermanent . . . both permanent and impermanent . . . neither permanent nor impermanent”—is true, the others are false’ refers to consciousness.
 “Similarly, ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world are finite”—is true, the others are false’ refers to form. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world are not finite . . . both finite and not finite . . . neither finite nor not finite”—is true, the others are false’ refers to form. Connect this in the same way also with feeling, perception, and volitional factors. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world are finite”—is true, the others are false’ refers to consciousness. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world are not finite . . . both finite and not finite . . . neither finite nor not finite”—is true, the others are false’ refers to consciousness.
 “ ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world continue to exist after death”—is true, the others are false’ refers to form. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world do not continue to exist after death . . . both continue to exist and do not continue to exist . . . neither continue to exist nor not continue to exist”—is true, the others are false’ refers to form. Connect this in the same way also with feeling, perception, and volitional factors. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world continue to exist after death”—is true, the others are false’ refers to consciousness. ‘Just this statement—“the soul and the world do not continue to exist after death . . . both  continue to exist and do not continue to exist . . . neither continue to exist nor not continue to exist”—is true, the others are false’ refers to consciousness.
 “ ‘Just this statement—“the living being is the body . . . the living being is one thing and the body is another”—is true, the others are false’ refers to form. Connect this in the same way also with feeling, perception, and volitional factors. ‘Just this statement—“the living being is the body . . . the living being is one thing and the body is another”—is true, the others are false’ refers to consciousness. Therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know the thoughts of other beings or other persons that have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded for what they are. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas know form. How do they know form? They know it just as they know suchness without distortion, without conceptualization, without a causal sign, without effort, without thought construction, and without apprehending anything. Similarly, they know feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness. How do they know consciousness? They know it just as they know suchness without distortion, without conceptualization, without a causal sign, without effort, without thought construction, and without apprehending anything. Therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom, know the thoughts of other beings and other persons that have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded for what they are. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti,  the suchness of the thoughts of other beings or other persons that have moved excessively, are freed from movement, have moved to abridge, or are expanded is the suchness of the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields. The suchness of the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields is the suchness of all dharmas. The suchness of all dharmas is the suchness of the six perfections. The suchness of the six perfections is the suchness of the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening. The suchness of the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening is the suchness of the emptinesses. The suchness of the emptinesses is the suchness of the eight gateways to liberation. The suchness of the eight gateways to liberation is the suchness of the nine serial absorptions. The suchness of the nine serial absorptions is the suchness of the ten tathāgata powers. The suchness of the ten tathāgata powers is the suchness of the fearlessnesses. The suchness of the fearlessnesses is the suchness of the detailed and thorough knowledges. The suchness of the detailed and thorough knowledges is the suchness of love and compassion. The suchness of love and compassion is the suchness of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. The suchness of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha is the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects. The suchness of the knowledge of all aspects is the suchness of wholesome and unwholesome dharmas. The suchness of wholesome and unwholesome dharmas is the suchness of dharmas that are ordinary and extraordinary, are with outflows and without outflows,  are basic immorality and not basic immorality, are with afflictions and without afflictions, are defilement and purification, and are compounded and uncompounded. The suchness of dharmas that are compounded and uncompounded is the suchness of past, future, and present dharmas. The suchness of past, future, and present dharmas is the suchness of a stream enterer. The suchness of a stream enterer is the suchness of the result of stream enterer, and similarly, the suchness of a once-returner, a non-returner, a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha. The suchness of a pratyekabuddha is the suchness of a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. The suchness of a pratyekabuddha’s awakening is the suchness of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. The suchness of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is the suchness of a tathāgata. The suchness of a tathāgata is the suchness of all beings. Therefore, Subhūti, the suchness of a tathāgata and the suchness of all beings is a single suchness, an unbroken suchness, and that unbroken suchness is not extinguished, and since it is not extinguished it is nondual.
 “Subhūti, the tathāgatas have fully awakened to this suchness of all dharmas thanks to this perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas. Similarly, Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom reveals the world. Therefore, Subhūti, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly  complete buddhas comprehend the suchness of all dharmas, comprehend the unmistaken suchness, and the unaltered suchness that is the suchness on account of which they are called a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha.” 
 Subhūti said, “Lord, this—namely, the perfection of wisdom, the suchness of all dharmas, unmistaken suchness, and unaltered suchness—is deep. Lord, this suchness has made the awakening of the lord buddhas clear. Lord, who with the exception of bodhisattvas irreversible from awakening, persons who have a perfect view, and worthy ones whose outflows have dried up believes this? Lord, these dharmas are deep. The Tathāgata has revealed them having fully awakened.”
 “It is because suchness is not extinguished, Subhūti,” said the Lord. “And why is it not extinguished? Suchness is not extinguished because all dharmas are not extinguished. Subhūti, this—namely, the suchness of all dharmas—the Tathāgata has explained having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
This was the forty-second chapter, “Revealing the World,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 43: Inconceivable
Then as many gods as there were stationed in the great billionfold world system, living in the desire realm, and living in the form realm took sandalwood powders and specifically approached the Lord, went up to him, bowed their heads to the feet of the Lord, and stood to one side. Even while standing to one side those gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm said  to the Lord, “Lord, this revelation of the perfection of wisdom is deep. Why, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom deep?” 
The Lord replied, “Gods, this perfection of wisdom is deep because it is marked by emptiness. Gods, the perfection of wisdom is marked by signlessness, is marked by wishlessness, marked by the absence of occasioning anything, marked by the absence of production, marked by the absence of stopping, marked by the absence of defilement, marked by the absence of purification, marked by the absence of an existent thing, marked by an intrinsic nature, marked by the absence of a foundation, marked by the absence of annihilation, marked by the absence of going on and on forever, marked by the absence of unity, marked by the absence of difference, marked by the absence of coming, marked by the absence of going, and is marked by space. Gods, since this perfection of wisdom is marked like that, the Tathāgata uses the conventional label as an ordinary conventional term, but not as an ultimate one.
“Gods, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras cannot disturb those marks. And why? Gods, it is because the world with its gods, humans, and asuras has just the marks it has as well. Gods, a mark does not disturb a mark. A mark does not know a mark. A mark does not know the absence of a mark. The absence of a mark does not know a mark. And the absence of a mark does not know the absence of a mark. Therefore, in that mark, and in that absence of a mark, and also in them both that which makes known, or who  makes known, or to whom it is made known, or the intrinsic nature of whom it is made known to do not exist.
“Gods, those marks are not occasioned by form, and they are not occasioned by feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. They are not occasioned by the perfection of giving. They are not occasioned by the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom. They are not occasioned by all the emptinesses. They are not occasioned by the dharmas on the side of awakening; they are not occasioned by the powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or distinct attributes of a buddha; and they are not occasioned by the knowledge of all aspects. Gods, they are not human or nonhuman, or with outflows or without outflows, or ordinary or extraordinary, or compounded or uncompounded, because all marks have no mark. 
“Gods, if somebody says ‘the mark of space is like this,’ would they be making a correct statement?”
“Lord, they would not be making a correct statement,” said the gods. “And why? Lord, space is not known through any mark, because the space element is uncompounded.” 
“Gods,” said the Lord, “whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise the element of marks simply remains as it really is, the element of no marks. A tathāgata has perfectly and fully awakened to that,  therefore a tathāgata is called a ‘tathāgata.’ ” 
“Lord,” replied the gods, “because a tathāgata has fully awakened to those marks, the knowledge of a tathāgata is unattached. Those are the marks with which a tathāgata remains teaching all marks, and these marks a tathāgata has fully awakened to are deep. 
“Lord, the Tathāgata has given an exposition of all marks by giving an exposition of the perfection of wisdom. Lord, this perfection of wisdom within the range of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas is deep, and it is totally amazing that the Tathāgata has fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening through practicing it, and, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, has differentiated all the marks: has differentiated the mark of form, and the marks of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to has differentiated the mark of all dharmas; and has differentiated the mark of the knowledge of all aspects.” 
Then the Lord said to those gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm, “The mark of form is something that can show itself, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to that very form through the absence of a mark. Similarly, the mark of feeling is experience . . . ; the mark of perception is taking up . . . ; the mark of volitional factors is occasioning something . . . ; and the mark of consciousness is a specific cognition, but  a tathāgata has fully awakened even to that through the absence of a mark. The mark of the aggregates is suffering, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to those through the absence of a mark. The mark of the constituents is like a poisonous snake, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to those through the absence of a mark. The mark of the sense fields is a gateway to coming about, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to those through the absence of a mark. The mark of dependent origination is where everything is complete, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to that through the absence of a mark. The mark of the perfection of giving is abandoning, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to that through the absence of a mark. The mark of the perfection of morality is not getting overheated. . . ; the mark of the perfection of patience is not being upset . . . ; the mark of the perfection of perseverance is not being able to be crushed . . . ; the mark of the perfection of concentration is being collected . . . ; and the mark of the perfection of wisdom is rejecting, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to that through the absence of a mark. The mark of the four concentrations . . . ; the four immeasurables . . . ; and the four formless absorptions is being undisturbed, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to them through the absence of a mark. The thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are marked by causing escape, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to them through the absence of a mark. The mark of emptiness is detachment . . . ; the mark of signlessness is peace . . . ; and the mark of wishlessness is eliminating suffering, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to that through the absence of a mark. The mark of the deliverances  is causing release, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to them through the absence of a mark.
Similarly, connect the powers with the mark of being very certain . . . ; the fearlessnesses with the mark of being very firmly grounded . . . ; the detailed and thorough knowledges with the mark of being something that cannot be torn away . . . ; great love with the mark of supplying benefit . . . ; great compassion with the mark of protecting . . . ; great joy with the mark of great delight in all the buddhadharmas . . . ; great equanimity with the mark of remaining indifferent toward pleasure and pain, gaining and not gaining, fame and infamy, and praise and blame that cause faults in beings . . . ; and the distinct attributes of a buddha with the mark of not being partaken of, but the Tathāgata has fully awakened even to them through the absence of a mark. The mark of the knowledge of a knower of all aspects is direct perception, but a tathāgata has fully awakened even to that through the absence of a mark. Thus, gods, a tathāgata has fully awakened to all dharmas through the absence of a mark. Therefore, gods, the Tathāgata is said to have knowledge that is unattached.”
Then the Lord said to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. The perfection of wisdom reveals the world to the tathāgatas. Why? The tathāgatas are contingent on this dharma, that is, the perfection of wisdom. They respect, revere, honor, and worship this dharma. Therefore, Subhūti, that dharma, the perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas respect, revere, honor,  and worship, is the true nature of dharmas. And why? Subhūti, the lord buddhas have appeared from this perfection of wisdom. 
 “Subhūti, the Tathāgata is cognizant of what has been done, and acknowledges what has been done. Subhūti, those who say ‘the Tathāgata is cognizant of what has been done and acknowledges what has been done’ make a correct statement. And how does the Tathāgata demonstrate that he is cognizant of what has been done, and acknowledge what has been done? Subhūti, since the Tathāgata, having traveled in that vehicle and on that path, fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, therefore the Tathāgata respects, reveres, honors, worships, protects, and treasures just that vehicle and just that path. You should view that as the Tathāgatas’ cognizance of what has been done and acknowledgment of what has been done.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the Tathāgata fully awakens to all dharmas as not done and not changed because there is no doer; because there is no body, he fully awakens to them as not done. Subhūti, the full awakening by the Tathāgata to all dharmas as without the act of doing, thanks to the perfection of wisdom, that is the Tathāgata’s cognizance of what has not been done, and acknowledgment of what has not been done. Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to the perfection of wisdom, on account of being ultimately unoriginated, the Tathāgata has engaged with all the dharmas of the unmade transcendental knowledge.
“Subhūti, because of this one of many explanations, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas.”
 “Lord, when all dharmas are not producers and are not revealers, how then does the perfection of wisdom  give birth to the tathāgatas and reveal the world?” asked Subhūti.
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “All dharmas are not producers and are not revealers. And why, Subhūti, are all dharmas not producers and not revealers? Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are empty, ring hollow, are in vain, are a fraud, and are pointless. Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, all dharmas are not producers and are not revealers.
“And why, Subhūti, are all dharmas not producers and not revealers? Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are without a foundation and do not belong to anything. Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, all dharmas are not producers and are not revealers. Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world. 
“It reveals it, moreover, because form is not seen. It reveals it because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not seen. Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world.”
 “Lord, how, because form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not seen, does it reveal it?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “when a consciousness with form as objective support does not arise, because, Subhūti, form is thus not seen, it reveals the world. Similarly, when a mind with feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness as objective support does not arise, because consciousness is thus not seen, it reveals the world. Connect this in the same way with each, up to when a consciousness with the knowledge of all aspects as objective support does not arise, because, Subhūti, the knowledge of all aspects  is thus not seen, it reveals the world. Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world.”
“Furthermore, Subhūti, how does the perfection of wisdom give birth to the tathāgatas and reveal the world? Subhūti, here this perfection of wisdom points out ‘the world is empty.’ How does it point out ‘the world is empty’? It points out ‘the world that is the five aggregates is empty’; it points out ‘the world that is the eighteen constituents is empty’; it points out ‘the world that is the twelve sense fields is empty’; it points out ‘the world that is the path of the ten wholesome actions is empty’; it points out ‘the world that is the four concentrations, four immeasureables, and four formless absorptions is empty’; it points out ‘the world that is the twelve links of dependent origination arising from ignorance as its condition is empty’; it points out ‘the world that is the sixty-two views, the view of the perishable collection, and so on, is empty’; it points out ‘the world that is the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening is empty’; it points out ‘the world that is the six perfections is empty’; similarly, it points out ‘the world that is inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is empty’; similarly, it points out ‘the world that is the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha is empty’; up to and it points out ‘the world that is the knowledge of all aspects is empty.’ Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world.
“Furthermore, Subhūti,  the tathāgatas are aware the world is empty, perfectly know the world is empty, realize the world is empty, and comprehend the world is empty. Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom reveals to the tathāgatas ‘the world is empty.’ How does it reveal ‘the world is empty’? It is because it reveals ‘the world that is the aggregates, the constituents, the sense fields, the path of the ten wholesome actions, the four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions, dependent origination, the sixty-two views (the view of the perishable collection and so on), the six perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, all the emptinesses, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the distinct attributes of a buddha, and the knowledge of all aspects is empty.’ Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom reveals to the tathāgatas that the world is inconceivable. How does it reveal that the world is inconceivable? It reveals that the world that is from the five aggregates up to the knowledge of all aspects is inconceivable. Similarly, it reveals that the world that is utterly isolated, inner emptiness, up to and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is inconceivable. Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom reveals to the tathāgatas that the world is calm. How does it reveal that the world is calm? It reveals that the world that is the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, up to and the knowledge of all aspects is calm. Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom reveals to the tathāgatas that the world is just emptiness. How does it reveal that the world is just emptiness? It reveals that  the world that is the five aggregates is just emptiness, it reveals that the world that is . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is just emptiness. Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives birth to the tathāgatas and reveals the world.
“Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom reveals the world to the tathāgatas such that there is no perception of the world here at all, and neither is there any perception of the world beyond. And why? Because those dharmas that cause the perception of the world here or a perception of the world beyond do not exist.” 
 Subhūti said, “Lord! This perfection of wisdom has been made available through the tremendous work of the lords. Lord, this perfection of wisdom has been made available through inconceivable work, incomparable work, immeasurable work, work equal to the unequaled.”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “This perfection of wisdom has been made available through the tremendous work of the tathāgatas. And how, through tremendous work, has this perfection of wisdom been made available? Protecting, supporting, and not giving up on all beings is the tremendous work of the tathāgatas. Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom has been made available through the tremendous work of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.
“How has this perfection of wisdom been made available through the inconceivable work of the tathāgatas? Subhūti, buddhahood,  tathāgatahood, the self-originated state, and the state of all-knowing are inconceivable. Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom has been made available through the inconceivable work of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. 
“How has this perfection of wisdom been made available through the incomparable work of the tathāgatas? Subhūti, among the mass of beings there is no being at all to which the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas can be related in thought or to whom they can be compared. Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom has been made available through the incomparable work of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. 
“How has this perfection of wisdom been made available through the immeasurable work of the tathāgatas? Subhūti, buddhahood, tathāgatahood, the self-originated state, and the state of all-knowing are immeasurable; nobody takes their measure. Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom has been made available through the immeasurable work of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. 
“How has this perfection of wisdom been made available through the work of the tathāgatas that is equal to the unequaled? There is no equal of the tathāgatas, so however could there be something superior? Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom has been made available through the work of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas that is equal to the unequaled.”
“Lord, are buddhahood, tathāgatahood, the self-originated state, and the state of a knower of all aspects  inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled?” asked Subhūti.
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Subhūti, buddhahood, tathāgatahood, the self-originated state, and the state of all-knowing are inconceivable. Similarly, Subhūti, buddhahood, tathāgatahood, the self-originated state, and the state of all-knowing are incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled. 
“Subhūti, in that which is the natural state of dharmas all mind and mental factor dharmas are not apprehended. Subhūti, form is inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled because it is not something to be known. Similarly, Subhūti, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled because they are not something to be known, up to the knowledge of all aspects is inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled because it is not something to be known.”
“Lord,” asked Subhūti, “why is form inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known; up to the knowledge of all aspects inconceivable, incomparable,  immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known?”
The Lord said, “Subhūti, because the intrinsic nature of form is no intrinsic nature it is inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known. Subhūti, because the intrinsic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is no intrinsic nature they are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known, up to because the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects is no intrinsic nature it is inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known.
“What do you think, Subhūti, can you, in form that is inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known, apprehend form? Similarly, Subhūti, can you apprehend feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , or consciousness in consciousness that is inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known? What do you think, Subhūti, can you apprehend . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects in the knowledge of all aspects that is inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not something to be known?”
“No, Lord,” replied Subhūti.
“Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “all dharmas are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled.  Subhūti, these are the dharmas that are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled. Similarly, Subhūti, the tathāgata dharmas of the tathāgatas are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, equal to the unequaled, and not anything to be known. Subhūti, these tathāgata dharmas of the tathāgatas are inconceivable because there is no conceiving; incomparable because there is no comparing; immeasurable because there is no measuring; uncountable because there is no counting; and equal to the unequaled because there is no equal or unequal. Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, all dharmas are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled.
“Subhūti, those tathāgata dharmas of the tathāgatas are inconceivable because they are beyond conception; incomparable because they are beyond comparing; immeasurable because they are beyond measuring; uncountable because they are beyond counting; and equal to the unequaled because they are beyond equal and unequal. Because of this one of many explanations, Subhūti, all dharmas are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled.
“Subhūti, inconceivable is a word for no conception. Subhūti, incomparable is a word for no comparing. Subhūti, immeasurable is a word for no measuring. Subhūti, uncountable is a word for beyond counting. Subhūti, equal to the unequaled is a term for unequaled and not equal.
“Subhūti, those tathāgata dharmas of the tathāgatas are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled. Subhūti, they are inconceivable because space is inconceivable. Similarly, they are incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and  equal to the unequaled because they are similar to space. Therefore, Subhūti, the dharmas of the tathāgatas are inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled. All the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and the world with its celestial beings, cannot think about, compare, measure, or count them. Therefore, the buddhas too are inconceivable and the buddhadharmas inconceivable as well.”
When this “Inconceivable, Incomparable, Immeasurable, Uncountable, and Equal to the Unequaled” chapter, one of many explanations of the Dharma, was being expounded, five hundred monks stopped appropriating anything and their minds became freed from outflows, and two thousand nuns stopped appropriating anything and their minds became freed from outflows as well. Dust-free and stainless, the Dharma eye of sixty thousand laymen became clear about the dharmas; and dust-free and stainless, the Dharma eye of thirty thousand laywomen became clear about the dharmas as well. Twenty thousand bodhisattvas also gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas and the Lord prophesied they would become buddhas right in this Fortunate Age.
This was the forty-third chapter, “Inconceivable,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 44: Made Up
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is deep. Lord, this perfection of wisdom has been made available through tremendous work. This perfection of wisdom has been made available through incomparable work, immeasurable work, incalculable work,  work equal to the unequaled.”
Venerable Subhūti having said this, the Lord replied to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom has been made available through tremendous work. This perfection of wisdom has been made available through incomparable work, immeasurable work, incalculable work, work equal to the unequaled. And why? Subhūti, it is because the six perfections make up this deep perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, it is because inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature make it up; and the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path make up this deep perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, it is because the Tathāgata’s ten powers make up this deep perfection of wisdom; the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha make it up; and because, Subhūti, the buddha, up to the knowledge of all aspects make up this deep perfection of wisdom.
“To illustrate, Subhūti, all royal work and all civic work of a king from a royal family who has been crowned in a consecration ceremony, who is powerful and has become His Majesty to his people, is given to a minister to do, so the king is less concerned with it and is relieved of the burden. Similarly, all the dharmas of śrāvakas, or all the dharmas of pratyekabuddhas, or all the dharmas of bodhisattvas, or all the buddha dharmas, whatever they are, they all make up the perfection of wisdom; it is this perfection of wisdom that  does their work. Therefore, Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom has been made available through tremendous work. Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom has been made available through incomparable work, immeasurable work, incalculable work, work equal to the unequaled. And why? Because, Subhūti, this deep perfection of wisdom is made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down on form; this deep perfection of wisdom is made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down on feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; this deep perfection of wisdom is made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down on . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects; this deep perfection of wisdom is made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down on the result of stream enterer; and similarly, this deep perfection of wisdom is made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down on the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, up to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Lord,” asked Subhūti, “how is this perfection of wisdom made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down on form? Lord, how is this deep perfection of wisdom made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down on feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness? How is this deep perfection of wisdom made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down on . . . up to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “do you see that form which you might hold on to and might settle down on, or which itself holds on and settles down? Subhūti, do you see that  feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness which you might hold on to and might settle down on, or which itself holds on and settles down?” 
“No, Lord,” he replied.
“Subhūti, do you see that unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening which you might hold on to and might settle down on, or which itself holds on and settles down?” he asked.
“No, Lord,” he replied.
“Excellent, excellent, Subhūti!” said the Lord. “Subhūti, I too do not see that form which you might hold on to and might settle down on, or which itself holds on and settles down. Subhūti, I too do not see . . . up to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And because I do not see it, I do not hold on to it. Because I do not hold on to it, I do not settle down on it. Subhūti, I too do not see a buddha level, all-knowledge, knowledge of all aspects, or tathāgatahood. And because I do not see it, I do not hold on to it. Because I do not hold on to it, I do not settle down on it. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattvas should not hold on to and should not settle down on form. They should not hold on to and should not settle down on feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Similarly, connect this with they should not hold onto and should not settle down on a buddha level, all-knowledge, knowledge of all aspects, or tathāgatahood.” 
Then the gods living in the desire realm and in the form realm said to the Lord, “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is deep,  hard to behold, hard to understand, not something about which you can speculate, not an object of speculative thought, calm, investigated as subtle, delicate, an object to be known by the brilliantly learned and wise. Lord, those bodhisattvas who believe in this perfection of wisdom served well the victors of the past and have been assisted by spiritual friends. Lord, those beings who believe in this deep perfection of wisdom keep on producing wholesome roots.
“Lord, even if all the beings who are in the great billionfold world system were faith followers, Dharma followers, the eighth, stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas, still, far superior to their knowledge and effort in, and single day’s pleasure in, and forbearance for thinking about, weighing, testing, exploration, and examination of this deep perfection of wisdom would be a single day’s pleasure in and forbearance for this sort of perfection of wisdom. 
“And why? Because that knowledge and effort of faith followers, Dharma followers, the eighth, and stream enterers, as well as the knowledge and effort of once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas, is the forbearance of the bodhisattva great beings who have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas.”
Then the Lord said to the gods living in the desire realm and in the form realm, “Excellent, excellent, gods! Exactly so, gods, exactly so! The knowledge and effort of faith followers, Dharma followers, the eighth,  stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas is the forbearance of the bodhisattva great beings who have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas. Gods, you should know that any sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who hear this perfection of wisdom and, having heard this perfection of wisdom, write it out, and having written it out, transmit, recite, and properly pay attention to it are sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who will quickly pass into complete nirvāṇa, while those in the Śrāvaka Vehicle and Pratyekabuddha Vehicle practicing other sūtras unconnected with this perfection of wisdom are not like that. And why? Because what faith followers and Dharma followers have to train in; what stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, and worthy ones, and those who have set out in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle have to train in; what bodhisattva great beings have to train in; and the most excellent dharmas that tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas who have fully awakened, will fully awaken, and are fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening have trained in are taught in detail in this perfection of wisdom.” 
Then the gods living in the desire realm and in the form realm said to the Lord, crying out cries of delight, “Lord, this—namely, this perfection of wisdom—is a tremendous perfection. Lord, this perfection of wisdom is an incomparable perfection,  immeasurable perfection, incalculable perfection, a perfection equal to the unequaled. Lord, even though faith followers, Dharma followers, the eighth, stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas have gone forth by training in this perfection of wisdom, and bodhisattva great beings have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening by training in it, still there has not become less of this deep perfection and there has not become more.” 
Then the gods living in the desire realm and in the form realm bowed their head to the Lord’s feet, circumambulated the Lord three times, withdrew from the presence of the Lord, and before they had gone very far disappeared—those gods who live in the desire realm to live in the desire realm, and those gods who live in the form realm to live in the form realm. 
Venerable Subhūti then asked to the Lord, “Where did they die, Lord, the bodhisattva great beings who have taken birth here and believe in this deep perfection of wisdom the moment they hear it?” 
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings who believe in this deep perfection of wisdom the moment they hear it will not be cowed, will not tense up, will not go blank, will not be of two minds, will not doubt, will delight  in hearing this deep perfection of wisdom, and, having heard it, will not become separated from attention to this deep perfection of wisdom. Whether they go or come or stand or sit, constantly and always they will not give up that attention to this deep perfection of wisdom—constantly and always they will follow after those persons who are Dharma preachers. To illustrate, Subhūti, a cow with a baby calf does not let go of her calf. Similarly, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings newly set out in the vehicle do not give up a Dharma preacher until they have internalized this deep perfection of wisdom, taken it up, memorized and recited it, investigated it with their thinking mind, and seen and penetrated it. So, because of this deep perfection of wisdom, Subhūti, having died as humans, they have taken birth here. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings newly set out in the vehicle have written out this deep perfection of wisdom, and, having written it out, have made it into a book, and have respected, revered, honored, and worshiped it with flowers, perfumes, incense, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. Because of that wholesome root, Subhūti, they have died as humans and taken birth as humans who believe in this deep perfection of wisdom the moment they hear it.”
Subhūti asked, “Lord, is there one of those many bodhisattvas endowed with those good qualities who, having attended on other lord buddhas, died there, and having taken birth here believes in this  deep perfection of wisdom the moment they hear it, and believing in it also writes it out, and having written it out transmits, recites, and properly pays attention to it?”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “That bodhisattva great being who attends on other lord buddhas in other buddhafields and, having died there, takes birth here and believes in this deep perfection of wisdom the moment they hear it, and believing in it also writes it out, and having written it out clearly articulates, recites, and properly pays attention to it. And why? Because that bodhisattva great being heard this deep perfection of wisdom from those lord buddhas, and having heard it also took it up, bore it in mind, recited it, and properly paid attention to it. It is because of those wholesome roots and that proper attention that they have taken birth here.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have died among the Tuṣita gods and, having taken birth here, share in the good fortune of humans—you should also be aware that they are indeed endowed with those good qualities as well. And why? Subhūti, it is because those bodhisattva great beings have thoroughly questioned the bodhisattva great being Maitreya about this perfection of wisdom. It is because of that wholesome root that they have taken birth here. 
 “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have not heard or asked about the perfection of wisdom in the past have taken birth in the human world, they have doubt, go blank, and feel cowed.  Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have heard and asked about the perfection of wisdom in the past hear an explanation of this deep perfection of wisdom, they do not have doubt, do not go blank, and do not feel cowed. Connect this in the same way with Subhūti, . . . the perfection of concentration . . . the perfection of perseverance  . . . the perfection of patience . . . and the perfection of morality as well. Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have not heard and not asked about this perfection of giving in the past hear an explanation of this deep perfection of wisdom, they have doubt, go blank, and feel cowed. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have not heard and not asked about inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the past hear an explanation of this deep perfection of wisdom, they have doubt, go blank, and feel cowed. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have not heard and not asked about the four applications of mindfulness in the past hear an explanation of this deep perfection of wisdom, they have doubt, go blank, and feel cowed. Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have not heard about the four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path in the past, or have heard but have not asked about them, hear an explanation of this deep perfection of wisdom, they have doubt,  go blank, and feel cowed. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings have heard and asked about this deep perfection of wisdom in the past, but even after hearing and asking about it still do not put it into practice and do not meditate on this deep perfection of wisdom for one day, or two days, or three days, or four days, or five days, or six days, or even ten days, they get robbed of it and they become separated from this deep perfection of wisdom. And why? Subhūti, it is because bodhisattva great beings who sometimes do and sometimes do not have the desire to practice the perfection of wisdom get robbed of it, because their minds are flighty like a wisp of cotton. Subhūti, you should know that, having set out in the vehicle, those bodhisattva great beings have not gone far, have not been looked after by spiritual friends, and have not attended on a perfectly complete buddha. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have not clearly articulated this deep perfection of wisdom, have not recited, have not properly paid attention to, and have not trained in the perfection of wisdom; bodhisattva great beings who have not trained in the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, or perfection of giving; who have not trained in inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature;  who have not trained in the applications of mindfulness; who have not trained in the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path; and who have not trained in the five clairvoyances, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, up to the knowledge of all aspects—Subhūti, you should know that they have newly set out in the vehicle. Subhūti, they just have faith, they just find pleasure in this deep perfection of wisdom, but they are not able to write out, read aloud, clearly articulate, recite from memory, or properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who do not write out this deep perfection of wisdom, do not clearly articulate it, do not recite it, do not properly pay attention to it, and also do not take up this deep perfection of wisdom, up to do not take up the knowledge of all aspects, do not put this deep perfection of wisdom into practice, connect this in the same way with each, up to do not put this knowledge of all aspects into practice—you should know that they will come to be at one of these two levels—that is, the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. Why? Because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family did not write out this deep perfection of wisdom in the past, and did not clearly articulate it, did not recite it, and did not properly pay attention to it. This deep perfection of wisdom did not look after them, and those bodhisattva  great beings also did not put this deep perfection of wisdom into practice. Therefore, you should know that those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will come to be at one of those two levels.”
This was the forty-fourth chapter, “Made Up,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 45: A Boat
“To illustrate, Subhūti, you should know that when a boat has broken up on the ocean, unless those people who are standing in it grab hold of a log, or an inflated skin, or a human corpse as a support, Subhūti, they will not reach the shore of the ocean and will die. Subhūti, when a boat has broken up on the ocean, those people who have it in mind to grab hold of a log, or an inflated skin, or a human corpse as a support, Subhūti, they will not die in the ocean; they will happily cross over the ocean and stand on dry land. Similarly, Subhūti, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle endowed with just faith and just joy who do not write out, clearly articulate, recite, or properly pay attention to the sūtras connected with this deep perfection of wisdom, and similarly, connect this with do not write out, clearly articulate, recite, or hold as a support the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, or perfection of giving, and similarly, connect this with each, up to do not write out, clearly articulate, recite, properly pay attention to, or hold as a support the knowledge of all aspects—you should know about these people in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who have set forth to the knowledge of all aspects that in the interim they will get into trouble on the path. They  will actualize the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level. Subhūti, those people in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who have faith, have forbearance, have serene confidence, have a surpassing aspiration, have enjoyment, have belief, have renunciation, and have not given up the effort for full awakening to unsurpassed, complete awakening will write out, clearly articulate, recite, and properly pay attention to this perfection of wisdom. Look, Subhūti, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family with faith, forbearance, serene confidence, a surpassing aspiration, belief, and renunciation, who have not given up the effort for unsurpassed, complete awakening, and those who assist the perfection of wisdom, up to assist the knowledge of all aspects will not get into trouble in the interim. They pass beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels and, having brought beings to maturity and purified a buddhafield, fully awaken to unsurpassed, complete awakening.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, when a man or a woman has it in mind to ladle water into an unfired, unbaked pot, you should know, Subhūti, that pot does not last long; straight away it gets ruined and dissolves. And why? Because that pot has not been fired and therefore afterward goes back to being ordinary earth. Similarly, Subhūti, if those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who have faith in,  have forbearance for, take joy in, have serene confidence in, have a surpassing aspiration toward, enjoy, have belief in, have sacrificed for, and have not given up the effort for full awakening to unsurpassed, complete awakening, but still are not assisted by the perfection of wisdom; are not assisted by skillful means; are not assisted by the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, or perfection of giving; are not assisted by inner emptiness, up to are not assisted by emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; are not assisted by the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path; are not assisted by the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; up to are not assisted by the knowledge of all aspects, then in the interim those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family will get into trouble. Subhūti, in the interim what trouble do those sons of a good family or daughters of a good sfamily in the Bodhisattva Vehicle get into? It is this, namely, the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, when a man or a woman has ladled river, or spring, or lake, or pond, or tank water into a fired pot you should know, Subhūti, that pot will happily make it back home. Similarly, if bodhisattva great beings who have faith in, have forbearance for,  take joy in, have serene confidence in, have a surpassing aspiration toward, enjoy, have belief in, have sacrificed for, and have not given up the effort for full awakening to unsurpassed, complete awakening are assisted by the perfection of wisdom, are assisted by skillful means, up to the knowledge of all aspects, then you should know, Subhūti, that those bodhisattva great beings will not in the interim get into trouble on the path—that is, on the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level—and without harm will fully awaken to unsurpassed, complete awakening. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, if an oceangoing ship that has not been well joined, with leaks unpatched and heavily loaded with goods, is launched on the water, Subhūti, you should know in the interim that boat will sink, the goods going one way and the boat another, and such a trader as that, unskilled in means, will meet with great harm and become separated from the great jewels. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattvas who have faith in, have forbearance for, take joy in, have serene confidence in, have a surpassing aspiration toward, enjoy, have belief in, have sacrificed for, and have not given up the effort for full awakening to unsurpassed, complete awakening, but still are not assisted by the perfection of wisdom, are not assisted by skillful means, up to are not assisted by the knowledge of all aspects, then, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings will get into trouble in the interim and lose a great profit—namely, they will lose the heap of jewels that is the knowledge of all aspects. Subhūti,  in the interim what trouble do those bodhisattva great beings get into? It is this, namely, the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, if a man gifted with intelligence plies his way on an oceangoing ship that has been well joined, with the leaks patched, you should know, Subhūti, in the interim that boat will not break up and will reach where it is going. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have faith in, have forbearance for, take joy in, have serene confidence in, have a surpassing aspiration toward, enjoy, have belief in, have sacrificed for, and have not given up the effort for full awakening to unsurpassed, complete awakening, and are also assisted by the perfection of wisdom, are also assisted by skillful means as well, up to are assisted by the knowledge of all aspects as well, then, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings will not turn back in the interim from unsurpassed, complete awakening. And why? Because, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings have faith in, have forbearance for, take joy in, have serene confidence in, have a surpassing aspiration toward, enjoy, have belief in, have sacrificed for, and have not given up the effort for full awakening to unsurpassed, complete awakening, and are assisted by the perfection of wisdom, also are assisted by skillful means, up to and are assisted by the knowledge of all aspects as well. Those bodhisattvas do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, if there is a very old, decrepit, one hundred and twenty-year-old man  and he falls sick in his body with a wind, or bile, or phlegm disorder, or a disorder from them in combination, what do you think, Subhūti, does that man have the power to get up as he personally might want to do?”
 “No, Lord,” said Subhūti.
 “Subhūti, does that man get up?” asked the Lord.
 “Lord,” replied Subhūti, “even were that man able to get up from a chair, still, because of his old age and his sickness he is frail, so he would not have the strength to go one krośa or two krośa. Even though he is able to get up from a chair he is not able to go.”
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings have faith in, have forbearance for, take joy in, have serene confidence in, have a surpassing aspiration toward, enjoy, have belief in, have sacrificed for, and have not given up the effort for full awakening to unsurpassed, complete awakening, because they have not also been assisted by the perfection of wisdom, up to have not been assisted by the knowledge of all aspects, then, Subhūti, because those bodhisattva great beings thus have not been assisted by the perfection of wisdom and have not been assisted by skillful means, they will fall in the interim to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, it is like two strong people lifting up from under his left and right armpits that same very old, decrepit, one hundred and twenty-year-old man who has fallen sick in his body with a wind, or bile, or phlegm disorder, or a disorder from them in combination,  and raising him up out of that chair, saying, ‘Hey! You sir! Held and supported by us go where you want to go, wherever you like. In the interim, up to arriving in that place, you will not fall.” Similarly, Subhūti, you should know that if bodhisattva great beings who have faith in, have forbearance for, take joy in, have serene confidence in, have a surpassing aspiration toward, enjoy, have belief in, have sacrificed for, and have not given up the effort for full awakening to unsurpassed, complete awakening have also been assisted by the perfection of wisdom and also have been assisted by skillful means, those bodhisattva great beings will not turn back in the interim; those bodhisattva great beings have the power to reach that ground—namely, unsurpassed, complete awakening.”
 Subhūti then asked, “How is it, Lord, that those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have set out in the Bodhisattva Vehicle have not been assisted by the perfection of wisdom and have not been assisted by skillful means and even fall to the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level?”
 “Excellent, Subhūti, excellent that you have it in mind to inquire of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha about this topic!” said the Lord. “Subhūti, here, right from the beginning when bodhisattvas give a gift they give the gift with a mindstream that has fallen into grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine.’ When they guard morality, are patient, make a vigorous effort,  are absorbed in concentration, and cultivate wisdom, they cultivate wisdom with a mind that has fallen into grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine.’ While giving a gift it occurs to them to think, ‘I am giving a gift; this gift has to be given; I am generous. I am protecting morality; morality has to be cultivated by me; I am moral. I am being patient; patience has to be cultivated by me; I am patient. I am making an effort; effort has to be made by me; I am industrious. I am becoming absorbed in concentration; concentration has to be cultivated by me; I am in possession of concentration. I am cultivating wisdom; wisdom has to be cultivated by me; I am wise.’ Thus, on account of that giving they falsely project things. They falsely project ‘that gift.’ They falsely project, ‘It is my gift.’ Similarly, they falsely project ‘morality, patience, perseverance, and concentration,’ as well as ‘wisdom.’ On account of wisdom they falsely project things. They falsely project, ‘This is my wisdom.’
 “And why? Because these thought constructions do not exist in the perfection of giving because the perfection of giving has gone to the farthest limit. These thought constructions do not exist in the perfection of morality. Similarly, thought construction also does not arise in the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, or the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because, whereas the perfection of wisdom has gone to the farthest limit, those in the Bodhisattva Vehicle  neither know the farthest limit nor know the farther shore, so they have not been assisted by the perfection of giving; have not been assisted by the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, or the perfection of wisdom; up to have not been assisted by the knowledge of all aspects, and hence fall to the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level and do not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Subhūti, how is it that a son of a good family or daughter of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle comes to be without skillful means? Subhūti, here, right from the beginning it occurs to a son of a good family or daughter of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle giving a gift without skillful means, guarding morality without skillful means, cultivating patience without skillful means, making an effort without skillful means, becoming absorbed in concentration without skillful means, and cultivating wisdom without skillful means that, ‘I am giving a gift; it has to be given to them; this gift has to be given. I am protecting morality. I am cultivating patience. I am making an effort. I have to become absorbed in concentration. I have to cultivate wisdom; wisdom has to be cultivated.’ So, they falsely project on account of that giving. They falsely project on account of the gift. They falsely project, ‘I am generous.’ They falsely project that it is moral. They falsely project on account of morality. They falsely project, ‘I am moral.’ They falsely project patience. They falsely project on account of patience.  They falsely project, ‘I am patient.’ They falsely project perseverance. They falsely project on account of perseverance. They falsely project, ‘I am industrious.’ They falsely project concentration. They falsely project on account of concentration. They falsely project, ‘I am in possession of concentration.’ They falsely project wisdom. They falsely project on account of wisdom. They falsely project, ‘I am wise.’ 
 “And why? Because those thought constructions do not exist in the perfection of giving as thought constructs them. And why? Because that—namely, the perfection of giving—has gone to the farthest limit. Similarly, connect this with because that—namely, the perfection of wisdom—has gone to the farthest limit. This is because those thought constructions do not exist in the perfection of wisdom as thought constructs them. And why? Because whereas that perfection of wisdom has gone to the farthest limit, those sons of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle neither know the farthest limit nor know the farther shore. They have not been assisted by the perfection of giving. Similarly, connect this with each as before, up to they have not been assisted by the perfection of wisdom, up to have not been assisted by the knowledge of all aspects, and hence fall to the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level and do not go forth to the knowledge of all aspects. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have not been assisted by the perfection of wisdom and skillful means fall to the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level.
 “How is it, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings assisted by the perfection of wisdom and skillful means do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level  and reach unsurpassed, complete awakening? 
 “Subhūti, here, right from the beginning it does not occur to bodhisattva great beings when giving a gift, up to cultivating wisdom, to falsely project with a thought that has fallen into grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine’ that, ‘I am giving a gift; this gift has to be given; the gift has to be given to them.’ Similarly, connect this with each, up to the perfection of wisdom. They do not falsely project giving. They do not falsely project on account of a gift. They do not falsely project, ‘This is my gift.’ Similarly, connect this with each, up to They do not falsely project the perfection of wisdom. They do not falsely project anything on account of wisdom. They do not falsely project, ‘This is my wisdom.’ 
 “And why? Because the thought construction on account of which there is false projection does not exist in the perfection of giving, up to the thought construction on account of which there is false projection does not exist in the perfection of wisdom. That—namely, the perfection of giving—up to the perfection of wisdom has gone to the farthest limit. And those bodhisattvas, furthermore, know the farthest limit and know the farther shore, so they have been assisted by the perfection of giving. They have been assisted by the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom, up to have been assisted by the knowledge of all aspects, and hence do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level and go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.
 “It is thus, Subhūti, that the bodhisattva great beings have been assisted by the perfection of wisdom and similarly have been assisted  by skillful means so they do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. Similarly, connect this with all the bright side just as you have with the dark side.”
This was the forty-fifth chapter, “Boat,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 46: Teaching the Intrinsic Nature of All Dharmas
The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti inquired of him, “Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings beginning the work train in the perfection of wisdom? How should they train in the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings beginning the work who want to train in the perfection of wisdom, and who want to train in the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving, should attend on spiritual friends who teach the perfection of wisdom. Those who want to train in . . . up to the perfection of giving should pursue, worship, and attend on spiritual friends who teach the perfection of giving.
 “They will also teach them this perfection of wisdom: ‘Come, son of a good family! Dedicate all your giving, and what you give, to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Come, son of a good family! Dedicate all your guarding of morality, your cultivation of patience, your making an effort at perseverance, your absorption  into concentration, and your cultivation of wisdom to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—but, son of a good family, you should not form an idea of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening from form. You should not form an idea from feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Son of a good family, you should not form an idea of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening from the perfection of giving. You should not form such an idea from the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom. You should not form such an idea from inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, or from the applications of mindfulness. You should not form such an idea from the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or paths. You should not form such an idea from the five clairvoyances, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Son of a good family, you should not even form an idea of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening itself. You should not form an idea even of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because when an idea of form has not been formed,up to the knowledge of all aspects is gained. When an idea of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness has not been formed, the knowledge of all aspects is gained. When an idea of the perfection of giving, the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, or the perfection of wisdom has not been formed; when an idea of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature has not been formed; when an idea of the applications of mindfulness has not been formed;  when an idea of right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path has not been formed; and when an idea of the clairvoyances, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha has not been formed, up to the knowledge of all aspects is gained. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, while practicing the perfection of wisdom you should not produce a longing for form. And why? Because form is without longing. Son of a good family, you should not produce a longing for feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , up to consciousness. And why? Because consciousness is without longing. Son of a good family, you should not produce a longing for the perfection of giving, and you should not produce a longing for the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, or concentration. Son of a good family, you should not produce a longing for the perfection of wisdom. You should not produce a longing for inner emptiness, and you should not produce a longing for . . . , up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. You should not produce a longing for the applications of mindfulness, and you should not produce a longing for the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, up to the path. You should not produce a longing for the five clairvoyances, ten powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the distinct attributes of a buddha. Son of a good family, you should not produce a longing even for the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because the knowledge of all aspects is without longing and is not an object of longing. Son of a good family, you should not produce a longing for the result of stream enterer. You should not produce a longing for the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening.  You should not produce a longing for the secure state of a bodhisattva. And why? Son of a good family, it is because awakening is without longing. And why? Son of a good family, it is because all dharmas are empty of their own intrinsic nature.’ They teach the Dharma in that way.”
 Subhūti said, “Lord, those bodhisattva great beings who want unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, yearning for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, even while all phenomena are empty of their own marks, are those who do what is difficult.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so,” replied the Lord. “Those bodhisattva great beings who want unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, who are yearning for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening even while all phenomena are empty of their own mark, are those who do what is difficult. But still, Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings understand that all phenomena are like an illusion and like a dream they have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Bodhisattva great beings have set out for the benefit and happiness of the world. They have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, thinking, ‘May I become the world’s protector.’ They have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, thinking, ‘May I become the world’s refuge, the world’s resting place, the world’s final ally, the world’s island, the world’s leader, and the world’s support.’
 “How, Subhūti, have bodhisattva great beings set out for the benefit of the world? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings free beings from the five forms of life  and establish them in nirvāṇa on the fearless plain of happiness. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening have set out for the benefit of the world.
 “How, Subhūti, have bodhisattva great beings set out for the happiness of the world? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening free beings from suffering, depression, and grief and establish them on the fearless plain of happiness in nirvāṇa. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings have set out for the happiness of the world.
 “How, Subhūti, are bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening the world’s protector? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening protect beings from whatever suffering there is in saṃsāra, teaching them the Dharma so they can stop it. They, having listened to that Dharma, gradually pass into complete nirvāṇa in the three vehicles. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are the world’s protector. 
 “How, Subhūti, are bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening the world’s refuge? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening  liberate beings subject to birth, old age, sickness, death, pain, lamentation, suffering, depression, and grief, from birth, old age, sickness, death, pain, lamentation, suffering, depression, and grief, and having liberated them, cause them to pass into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings are the world’s refuge. 
 “How, Subhūti, are bodhisattva great beings the world’s resting place? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings teach the Dharma so that all phenomena do not mingle. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are the world’s resting place.” 
 “How are all phenomena not mingled?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord replied, “That nonmingling of form is the nonconnection of form. That is the nonproduction of form. That nonproduction of form is the noncessation of form, and that is why there is the nonmingling of form. That which is the nonproduction and noncessation of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is the nonmingling of consciousness; connect this in the same way with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening teach the Dharma so that all phenomena do not mingle. 
 “How, Subhūti, are bodhisattva great beings who want  to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening the world’s final ally? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings teach the Dharma to beings as follows: ‘The farther shore of form is not form. The farther shore of feeling . . . perception . . . volitional factors . . . and consciousness is not the farther shore of consciousness; connect this in the same way with each, up to the farther shore of the knowledge of all aspects is not the knowledge of all aspects.’ They teach the Dharma like that. Subhūti, as form really is, so too are all dharmas.”
 Subhūti asked, “Lord, if all phenomena too are as form really is, will not bodhisattva great beings have indeed fully awakened to the knowledge of all aspects? Why? Because, Lord, on the farther shore of form there is no thought construction whatsoever; on the farther shore of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness there is no thought construction whatsoever, of the sort ‘this is form, this is feeling, this is perception, these are volitional factors,’ or ‘this is consciousness’; up to ‘this is the knowledge of all aspects’; up to on the farther shore of the knowledge of all aspects there is no thought construction whatsoever.” 
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “On the farther shore of form, Subhūti, there is no thought construction whatsoever, up to on the farther shore of the knowledge of all aspects there is no thought construction whatsoever. But still, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings ponder and are not cowed by such phenomena as those, and think, ‘I must thus fully awaken to those phenomena.’ Those who thus, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, teach those phenomena that are so calm and  so sublime are those who do what is difficult. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are the world’s final ally. 
 “How, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, become the world’s island? 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, those places delimited by the waters of great rivers or oceans are called islands. Similarly, Subhūti, form is delimited by a past and a future. Feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are delimited by a past and a future, up to the knowledge of all aspects is delimited by a past and a future. Subhūti, all phenomena are delimited by those past and future delimitations. Subhūti, that delimitation of all phenomena by a past and a future is this: namely, emptiness, the absence of being apprehended, the end of the road, the extinction of craving, the remainder, detachment, cessation, and nirvāṇa. It is calm, it is sublime, it is as it really is. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings teaching that all phenomena are delimited by past and future delimitation, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, are the world’s island. 
 “How, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, become the world’s leader? 
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening  generate great compassion for the mass of beings and teach and explain the Dharma: form is unproduced, does not stop, is not defilement, and is not purification. They teach the Dharma: feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are unproduced, do not stop, are not defilement, and are not purification; and similarly, they teach and explain the Dharma: all the perfections, all the emptinesses, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and the knowledge of all aspects are unproduced, do not stop, are not defilement, and are not purification. They teach and explain the Dharma: a pratyekabuddha’s awakening is unproduced, does not stop, is not defilement, and is not purification. They teach and explain the Dharma: the result of stream enterer is unproduced, does not stop, is not defilement, and is not purification; and similarly, they teach and explain the Dharma: the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the state of a worthy one are unproduced, do not stop, are not defilement, and are not purification. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, become the world’s leader.
 “How, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, become the world’s support?
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, teach the Dharma explaining that ‘form has space as its way of being’;  teach beings that ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness has space as its way of being’; and teach the Dharma explaining . . . up to ‘the knowledge of all aspects has space as its way of being.’ They teach beings that ‘the emptiness of form does not go and does not come because in it there is no going and no coming; the emptiness of feeling, perception, and volitional factors does not go and does not come.’ They teach beings that ‘the emptiness of consciousness does not go and does not come because in it there is no going and no coming.’ Similarly, they teach beings . . . up to ‘the emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects does not go and does not come because in it there is no going and no coming.’ In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, become the world’s support.
 “And why? Subhūti, it is because all phenomena have emptiness as their way of being, because they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in emptiness neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have signlessness as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in signlessness neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have wishlessness as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in wishlessness neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have the absence of occasioning anything as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in the absence of occasioning anything, neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Connect this in the same way with Subhūti, all phenomena have nonproduction, nonstopping, nondefilement, and nonpurification as their way of being; they do not pass beyond those ways of being. And why? Because in nonproduction, nonstopping, nondefilement, and nonpurification neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have a dream-like way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in a dream neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have an illusion-like way of being . . . , an apparition-like way of being . . . , and a magical creation-like way of being. They do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in a magical creation neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have the unborn and unreal as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in the unborn and unreal neither going nor coming is apprehended.
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have the limitless and boundless as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in the limitless and boundless neither going nor coming is apprehended.
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have the absence of being taken away from and the absence of being added to as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because where nothing has been taken away and nothing added neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have not going and not coming as their way of being. Subhūti, all phenomena have not bringing in and not sending out as their way of being. Subhūti, all phenomena have not joining, not not joining, not mingling, and not not mingling as their way of being. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have a self as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in a self neither going nor coming is apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have a being as their way of being. Subhūti, all dharmas have one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who motivates, one who feels, one who knows, and one who sees as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Subhūti, it is because if a self absolutely does not exist—if a being, one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who motivates, one who feels, one who knows, and one who sees absolutely do not exist—however, Subhūti, could going or coming  be apprehended?
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have permanence as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if permanence absolutely does not exist at all, however could going or coming be apprehended? Subhūti, all phenomena have pleasure as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. Subhūti, all phenomena have self as their way of being, and have beauty as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if permanence, pleasure, self, and beauty absolutely do not exist, however could their going or coming be apprehended? 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have impermanence as their way of being. Subhūti, all phenomena have suffering, no self, and unpleasantness as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if impermanence absolutely does not exist, and suffering, no self, and unpleasantness absolutely do not exist, however could their going or coming be apprehended? 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have greed as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if a place for greed absolutely does not exist, however could greed exist? Subhūti, all phenomena have hatred as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if a place for hatred absolutely does not exist, however could hatred exist? Subhūti, all phenomena have confusion as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if a place for confusion absolutely does not exist, however could confusion exist? Subhūti, all phenomena have distortion as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if a place for distortion absolutely does not exist, however could distortion exist? 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have suchness as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in suchness neither going nor coming is apprehended. Subhūti, all phenomena have the dharma-constituent as their way of being. Subhūti, all phenomena have the very limit of reality as their way of being . . . , sameness as their way of being . . . , and the inconceivable element as their way of being;  they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in the inconceivable element neither going nor coming is apprehended.
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have being unmoving as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because phenomena do not move anywhere, so going and coming do not exist.
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have form as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if form absolutely does not exist, however could its going or coming exist? Similarly, Subhūti, all phenomena have feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Subhūti, it is because if consciousness absolutely is not apprehended, however could its going or coming be apprehended? 
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have the perfection of giving as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if the perfection of giving absolutely does not exist, however could the perfection of giving’s going or coming exist? Similarly, Subhūti, all phenomena have the perfection of morality as their way of being . . . ; and all phenomena have the perfection of patience . . . , perseverance . . . , concentration . . . , and wisdom as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if the perfection of wisdom absolutely does not exist, however could the perfection of wisdom’s going or coming exist?
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have inner emptiness as their way of being. Subhūti, all phenomena have . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature absolutely does not exist, however could its going or coming exist?
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have the applications of mindfulness as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because if the applications of mindfulness absolutely do not exist, however could their going or coming exist? Similarly, Subhūti,  all phenomena have the right efforts . . . , the legs of miraculous power . . . , the faculties . . . , the powers . . . , the limbs of awakening . . . , the path . . . , the ten powers . . . , the four fearlessnesses . . . , the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . , and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in the buddhadharmas neither going nor coming is apprehended.
 “Subhūti, all phenomena have stream enterer as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. Subhūti, all phenomena have once-returner . . . , non-returner . . . , the state of a worthy one . . . , and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in pratyekabuddhas neither going nor coming is apprehended. Subhūti, all phenomena have unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening as their way of being; they do not pass beyond that way of being. And why? Because in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening neither going nor coming is apprehended.”
 “Lord, who will believe in this deep perfection of wisdom?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “those bodhisattva great beings who have practiced the practice for the sake of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, who have served well the victors of the past, who have been brought to maturity by the buddhas of the past who caused their wholesome roots to accumulate, who have attended on many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion buddhas, and who have been assisted by spiritual friends will believe in this deep perfection of wisdom.”
This was the forty-sixth chapter, “Teaching the Intrinsic Nature of All Dharmas,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 47: Taming Greed
Subhūti  then asked, “Lord, what will the attributes, tokens, and signs be of those bodhisattva great beings who will believe in this deep perfection of wisdom, and what will be their intrinsic nature?”
Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord replied to him, “Those bodhisattva great beings who will believe in this deep perfection of wisdom have eliminated greed and are in their intrinsic nature isolated from it; they have also eliminated hatred and confusion and are in their intrinsic nature isolated from them. Subhūti, they are in their intrinsic nature isolated from the token of greed. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings are in their intrinsic nature isolated from the tokens of hatred and confusion. 
“Subhūti, they are in their intrinsic nature isolated from the sign of greed. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings are in their intrinsic nature isolated from the signs of hatred and confusion.” 
“Lord, what sort of way of being will these bodhisattva great beings who will realize this deep perfection of wisdom have?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “those bodhisattva great beings who realize this deep perfection of wisdom will have the knowledge of all aspects as their way of being.”
Subhūti said, “Lord, those bodhisattva great beings who have the knowledge of all aspects as their way of being are the support of all beings.”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Those bodhisattva great beings who believe in this deep  perfection of wisdom are the support of all beings because they have the knowledge of all aspects as their way of being.”
Subhūti said, “Lord, those who do what is difficult are those bodhisattva great beings who have buckled on that armor, thinking, ‘We will place all beings in complete nirvāṇa,’ even while not apprehending a being or the designation of a being.”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Those who do what is difficult are those bodhisattva great beings who have buckled on that armor, thinking, ‘We will place all beings in complete nirvāṇa.’ 
“Subhūti, that armor of bodhisattva great beings is not spliced with form. And why? Subhūti, it is because form and that armor of bodhisattvas absolutely do not exist; that is why, Subhūti, it is said ‘that armor is not spliced with form.’ Subhūti, that armor of bodhisattva great beings is not spliced with feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. And why? Subhūti, it is because feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness and that armor of bodhisattvas absolutely do not exist; that is why, Subhūti, it is said ‘that armor is not spliced with consciousness.’ Subhūti, that armor is not spliced with an owner, and it is not spliced with a being, a living being, a creature, one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who does, one who motivates, one who feels, one who knows, or one who sees, up to Subhūti, that armor is not spliced with the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Subhūti, it is because the knowledge of all aspects absolutely does not exist, and the armor of bodhisattvas absolutely does not exist and is not apprehended; that is why, Subhūti, it is said ‘that armor of bodhisattva great beings is not spliced with . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects.’ Ah! Subhūti, that armor of those bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom, of those bodhisattva great beings who have buckled on such armor, thinking, ‘We will place all beings in complete nirvāṇa,’ is not spliced with all dharmas.”
“Lord,” said Subhūti, “they should know that there are two places where those bodhisattva great beings who have buckled on the armor, thinking, ‘We will place all beings in complete nirvāṇa,’ do not go—the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. Lord, it is impossible and there is no chance of it. It is impossible that bodhisattva great beings who have buckled on such armor, thinking, ‘We will place all beings in complete nirvāṇa,’ would fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. And why? Because bodhisattva great beings do not buckle on the armor for the sake of beings, having drawn in the boundaries.”
Venerable Subhūti having said this, the Lord then asked him, “What is the reality you are seeing, Subhūti, that forces you to say, ‘They should know that there are two places,’ one or the other, ‘where those bodhisattva great beings who have buckled on the armor do not go—the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level’?”
Subhūti replied, “Lord it is thus: bodhisattva great beings have not buckled on armor for the sake of only a partial number of beings. Lord, bodhisattva great beings have buckled on armor for the sake of all beings. Lord, bodhisattva great beings have buckled on armor for the knowledge of a knower of all aspects.” 
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “Bodhisattva great beings have not buckled on armor for the sake of only a partial number of beings. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings have buckled on armor for the sake of all beings; they have buckled on armor for the knowledge of a knower of all aspects.”
“Lord, this perfection of wisdom is deep,” said Subhūti. “It is not something that somebody has to meditate on, it is not something that has to be meditated on somewhere, and it is not something that has to be meditated on somehow. And why? Because, Lord, in this deep perfection of wisdom you cannot apprehend the perfect development of any phenomenon—someone who might meditate, something which might be meditated on, or something by means of which meditation might take place. 
“Lord, the meditation on space is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The meditation on the nonexistence of all dharmas is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The meditation on the not truly real is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The meditation on not holding onto anything is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The meditation on disintegration is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom.”
The Lord asked, “What is it—namely, the disintegration of meditation—that is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Lord,” replied Subhūti, “the disintegration of the meditation on form is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, the disintegration of the meditation on feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. Lord,  the disintegration of the meditation on self is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. Lord, the disintegration of the meditation on . . . up to one who knows and one who sees is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. Lord, the disintegration of the meditation on the perfection of giving is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, the disintegration of the meditation on . . . up to the perfection of wisdom is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. Lord, the disintegration of the meditation on inner emptiness, up to the disintegration of the meditation on the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. Lord, the disintegration of the meditation on the applications of mindfulness is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The disintegration of the meditation on the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The disintegration of the meditation on the ten powers is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The disintegration of the meditation on the fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The disintegration of the meditation on the result of stream enterer is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. The disintegration of the meditation on the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and from the bodhisattva levels up to the knowledge of all aspects is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom.”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord.  “The disintegration of the meditation on form is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, connect this with The disintegration of the meditation on . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom.
“Subhūti, you should look closely at a bodhisattva great being irreversible from this deep perfection of wisdom—‘Is the bodhisattva great being not attached to this deep perfection of wisdom?’ Similarly, connect this with you should look closely at a bodhisattva great being irreversible from the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving, up to you should look closely at a bodhisattva great being irreversible from the knowledge of all aspects—‘Is the bodhisattva great being not attached to this knowledge of all aspects? Does the irreversible bodhisattva great being practicing this deep perfection of wisdom not look at what others have said and what others have taught as pointless? Does the irreversible bodhisattva great being practicing this deep perfection of wisdom not go along with what somebody else believes? Is the irreversible bodhisattva great being practicing this deep perfection of wisdom not captured by the production of thoughts connected with greed, not captured by the production of thoughts connected with hatred and confusion?’ 
“You should look closely at whether irreversible bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom are not separated from the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience,  perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom. When this deep perfection of wisdom is being taught, do those irreversible bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom not tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified? Look closely at whether their minds are not cowed, do not tense up, and do not experience regret; are not separated from the perfection of wisdom; delight in the perfection of wisdom and in hearing the perfection of wisdom, and, having heard it, take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, properly pay attention to it, and focus on it in practice.
“Subhūti, you should know that the irreversible bodhisattva great beings have asked about this deep perfection of wisdom also in the past, and have taken it up, borne it in mind, read it aloud, mastered it, and properly paid attention to it. And why? Because when there is an exposition of this deep perfection of wisdom, those irreversible bodhisattva great beings do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified; their minds are not cowed, do not tense up, and do not experience regret; and, on top of that, having heard the perfection of wisdom they take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, and properly pay attention to it.”
“Lord,” asked Subhūti, “those bodhisattva great beings who do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified; whose minds are not cowed, do not tense up, and do not experience regret when there is an exposition of this deep perfection of wisdom—how should those bodhisattva great beings think carefully about this deep  perfection of wisdom?” 
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should think carefully about this deep perfection of wisdom with mindstreams inclined to the knowledge of all aspects,” replied the Lord.
“Lord, how should those bodhisattva great beings think carefully about this deep perfection of wisdom with mindstreams inclined to the knowledge of all aspects?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings should think carefully about this deep perfection of wisdom with mindstreams inclined to emptiness, tending to emptiness, and heading to emptiness. 
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should think carefully about this deep perfection of wisdom with mindstreams inclined to signlessness, with mindstreams inclined to wishlessness, inclined to space, and similarly, connect this with with mindstreams inclined to the unproduced, the unceasing, the absence of defilement and the absence of purification, and inclined to suchness, the dharma-constituent, the very limit of reality, sameness, the inconceivable, and what does not occasion anything. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should think carefully about this deep perfection of wisdom with mindstreams inclined to what is like a dream and like a magical creation.”
 Subhūti then inquired, “Lord, given what you have said—‘Bodhisattva great beings should think carefully about this deep perfection of wisdom with mindstreams inclined to emptiness,’ up to ‘Bodhisattva great beings should think carefully about this deep perfection of wisdom with mindstreams inclined to what is like a dream’ —well then, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings also think carefully about form? Do they also think carefully about feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness? Do they also think carefully about . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects?” 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings do not think carefully about form. They also do not think carefully about feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Similarly, connect this with Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings also do not think carefully about . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “And why? Subhūti, it is because nobody has made the knowledge of all aspects, and nobody has made it change. It has not come from anywhere, is not going anywhere, is not anywhere, is not in a place, and is not in a location. You cannot apprehend its number, coming, or going, and nobody is able to fully awaken to something whose number, coming, and going cannot be apprehended, because nobody fully awakens through form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; through giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom; up to through knowledge of the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because just form is the knowledge of all aspects; just feeling . . . , just perception . . . , just volitional factors . . . , and just consciousness is the knowledge of all aspects. And why?  Subhūti, it is because that suchness of form and that suchness of the knowledge of all aspects is a single suchness. Similarly, that suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness and that suchness of the knowledge of all aspects is a single suchness. Similarly, that suchness of the perfections, the dharmas on the side of awakening, the powers, the fearlessnesses, the detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha and that suchness of the knowledge of all aspects is a single suchness. That is the suchness of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.”
This was the forty-seventh chapter, “Taming Greed,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 48: A Presentation of the Bodhisattvas’ Training
Then the gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm took up divine sandalwood powders, took up divine blue lotus, red lotus, and white lotus flowers, and specifically strewed them down on the Lord. Having strewed them they approached the Lord, went up to him, bowed their heads to the Lord’s feet, and stood to one side. Even while standing to one side those gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm said to the Lord, “Lord, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have thus taught in this deep perfection of wisdom: ‘Just form is the knowledge of all aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects is form. Just feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness is the knowledge of all aspects,  and the knowledge of all aspects is consciousness. That which is the suchness of form and that which is the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects are a single suchness, not two and not divided. Similarly, connect this with that which is the suchness of  . . . up to the buddhas, and that which is the suchness of . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects are a single suchness, not two and not divided.’ Thus, this perfection of wisdom—namely, the awakening of the tathāgatas—is deep, hard to behold, hard to understand, not something about which you can speculate, not an object of speculative thought, calm, subtle, an object to be known by the brilliantly learned and wise, a counterpoint to all that is ordinary.”
The gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm having said this, the Lord said to them, “Exactly so, gods, exactly so! Gods, just form is the knowledge of all aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects is form. Just feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness is the knowledge of all aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects is consciousness. Similarly, connect this with each, up to just the buddha is the knowledge of all aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects is just the buddha. That which is the suchness of form and that which is the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects are a single suchness, not two and not divided. Similarly, connect this with that which is the suchness of . . . up to the buddha, and that which is the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects are a single suchness not two and not divided. 
“Seeing this suchness forces  a tathāgata to incline toward a little less work and be uninclined to teach the doctrine. And why? Ah! It is because this—namely, the awakening of the tathāgatas—is deep, hard to behold, hard to understand, not something about which you can speculate, not an object of speculative thought, calm, subtle, an object to be known by the brilliantly learned and wise, a counterpoint to all that is ordinary, so nobody has fully awakened to it and it has not been fully awakened to anywhere. 
“Here where the habitual idea of two does not exist is the deep state of dharmas. Gods, because space is deep this doctrine is deep. Gods, this doctrine is deep because suchness is deep, the dharma-constituent is deep, the very limit of reality is deep, and the inconceivable element is deep. Gods, because the limitless and boundless . . . , the sameness of not coming and not going . . . , the sameness of not being produced and not stopping . . . , the sameness of not being defiled and not being purified . . . , the sameness of what does not occasion anything . . . , the deep state of self . . . , up to because the sameness of one who knows and one who sees is deep this doctrine is deep. 
 “Gods, because form is deep this doctrine is deep. Gods, because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are deep this doctrine is deep. Gods, because the perfection of giving is deep this doctrine is deep. Gods, because the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom are deep this doctrine is deep. Ah! Gods, because inner emptiness is deep this doctrine is deep; because . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is deep this doctrine is deep; because the applications of mindfulness are deep, and the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path are deep this doctrine is deep; because the ten powers, fearlessnesses,  detailed and thorough knowledges, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are deep, up to the knowledge of all aspects is deep this doctrine is deep.”
The gods said, “O Lord, this doctrine is taught as a counterpoint to all that is ordinary. And why? Because this doctrine is not taught so form will be taken up or will not be taken up. It is not taught so feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness will be taken up or will not be taken up. It is not taught so . . . up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha will be taken up or will not be taken up. It is not taught so the buddhadharmas will be taken up or will not be taken up. Lord, this deep teaching of the doctrine is not taught so the result of stream enterer will be taken up or will not be taken up. It is not taught so the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or the knowledge of all aspects will be taken up or will not be taken up. 
“Lord, the world gets involved with taking things up, thinking, ‘This is my form. I am form. This is my feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness. I am consciousness.’ Similarly, connect this with each, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. ‘This is my result of stream enterer. I am the result of stream enterer. This is my result of once-returner. I am the result of once-returner. This is my result of non-returner. I am the result of non-returner. This is my state of a worthy one. I am the state of a worthy one. This is my pratyekabuddha’s awakening. I am a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. This is my knowledge of all aspects.  I am a knower of all aspects.’ ”
“Exactly so, gods, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Gods, this doctrine is not taught so form will be taken up or will not be taken up. It is not taught so feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness will be taken up or will not be taken up. Those who get involved in order to take up form, up to get involved in order to take up the knowledge of all aspects do not have the good fortune to meditate on the perfection of wisdom; they are incapable of meditating on, up to the perfection of concentration, perseverance, patience, morality, and giving; and they are incapable of meditating on, up to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Subhūti then said, “Lord, this doctrine is in harmony with all dharmas. With which dharmas is this doctrine in harmony? This doctrine is in harmony with the perfection of wisdom. Lord, this doctrine is in harmony with the perfection of concentration, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of patience, the perfection of morality, and the perfection of giving. Lord, this doctrine is in harmony with inner emptiness. Lord, this doctrine is in harmony with . . . , up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Lord, this doctrine is in harmony with . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Lord, this doctrine is not obstructed by anything. What is this doctrine not obstructed by? This doctrine is not obstructed by form. This doctrine is not obstructed by feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Similarly, this doctrine is not obstructed by . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “This doctrine, because of the sameness of space, the sameness of suchness, the sameness of the dharma-constituent, the sameness of the very limit of reality, the sameness of the inconceivable element, the sameness of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness, the sameness of not being produced and not stopping, and the sameness of not being defiled and not being purified, is marked by not being obstructed. 
 “This doctrine is not produced because form is not produced and does not stop; because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not produced and do not stop; and similarly, because . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects is not produced and does not stop.
 “This doctrine finds no footing because a footing for form is not apprehended; because a footing for feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is not apprehended; and similarly, because . . . , up to a footing for the knowledge of all aspects is not apprehended.”
 Then the gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm said to the Lord, “Lord, the elder Subhūti takes after the Lord. Why? Because whatever the elder Subhūti teaches, he teaches it all with emptiness as his point of departure.”
 Venerable Subhūti then responded to the gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm, “Gods, you say, ‘Lord, this elder Subhūti takes after the Lord.’ And how does he takes after him,  how does the elder Subhūti take after the Lord? The suchness of the Tathāgata has not come and has not gone. Similarly, the suchness of Subhūti has not come and has not gone. In that way the elder Subhūti takes after the Tathāgata.
 “Just that suchness of the Tathāgata is the suchness of all dharmas, and that suchness of all dharmas is the suchness of Subhūti. In that way the elder Subhūti takes after the Tathāgata. 
 “Just as the suchness of the Tathāgata is established, so too is the suchness of the elder Subhūti established, so the elder Subhūti takes after the Lord. Just as the suchness of the Tathāgata is unchanging and undifferentiated, so too with the suchness of the elder Subhūti, it also is unchanging and cannot be differentiated. Just as the suchness of the Tathāgata is not obstructed by anything, so too the suchness of all dharmas is not obstructed by anything. The suchness of the Tathāgata and the suchness of all dharmas are not two and cannot be divided into two. Suchness is not made. There is nothing of which that suchness is not the suchness. Because there is nothing of which that suchness is not the suchness and it is never not suchness, therefore suchness is not two and cannot be divided into two. In that way the elder Subhūti takes after the Tathāgata.
 “That suchness of the Tathāgata is totally unchanging and undifferentiated. So too the suchness of the elder Subhūti is totally unchanging and undifferentiated. Just as the suchness of the Tathāgata is not broken apart, is not different,  and cannot be apprehended, so too the suchness of all dharmas is not broken apart, is not different, and cannot be apprehended. Similarly, the suchness of the elder Subhūti is not broken apart, is not different, and cannot be apprehended either. In that way the elder Subhūti takes after the Tathāgata.
 “The suchness of the Tathāgata is not other than the suchness of all phenomena, and what is not other than the suchness of all phenomena is never not suchness. It is always suchness. The suchness of the elder Subhūti is like that. Therefore, since it is not something else, even though the elder Subhūti takes after the Tathāgata he does not take after him in anything. Just as the suchness of the Tathāgata is not past, is not future, and is not present, so too the suchness of all phenomena is not past, is not future, and is not present. Similarly, the suchness of the elder Subhūti is not past, is not future, and is not present. Therefore, it is said the elder Subhūti ‘takes after the Tathāgata.’
 “Gods, here you should know the suchness of the Tathāgata that is the same, through the suchness of the past that is the same, and the sameness of the suchness of the past, through the sameness of the suchness of the Tathāgata; the sameness of the suchness of the Tathāgata, through the sameness of the suchness of the future, and the sameness of the suchness of the future, through the sameness of the suchness of the Tathāgata; and the sameness of the suchness of the Tathāgata, through the sameness of the suchness of the present, and the sameness of the suchness of the present, through the sameness of the suchness of the Tathāgata. Therefore, the suchness of the past, future, and present  and the suchness of the Tathāgata are not two and cannot be divided into two.
 “The suchness of the Tathāgata is the suchness of form. The suchness of form is the suchness of the Tathāgata. Similarly, the suchness of the Tathāgata is the suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. Therefore, the suchness of form, the suchness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, and the suchness of the Tathāgata are not two and cannot be divided into two. Similarly, connect this with the suchness of the Tathāgata is the suchness of self. The suchness of self is the suchness of the Tathāgata. Similarly, the suchness of the Tathāgata is the suchness of . . . , up to one who knows and one who sees. The suchness of . . . , up to one who knows and one who sees is the suchness of the Tathāgata. Therefore, the suchness of self, up to the suchness of one who knows and one who sees, and the suchness of the Tathāgata are not two and cannot be divided into two. 
Similarly, connect this with the suchness of the perfection of giving, the suchness of the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration and wisdom, and the suchness of the Tathāgata are not two and cannot be divided into two. The suchness of inner emptiness, the suchness of . . . , up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and the suchness of the Tathāgata are not two and cannot be divided into two. The suchness of the applications of mindfulness, the suchness of the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties,  powers, limbs of awakening, and path, and the suchness of the Tathāgata are not two and cannot be divided into two. The suchness of the Tathāgata is the suchness of the ten tathāgata powers, fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and the suchness of . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects. The suchness of . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects is the suchness of the Tathāgata. Therefore, the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects and the suchness of the Tathāgata are not two and cannot be divided into two. 
 “Gods, thanks to this perfect suchness the Tathāgata has fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and gets to be called Tathāgata.” 
 As this “Suchness” chapter was being expounded the great billionfold world system shook in six ways: it quaked, quaked greatly, and quaked violently; shook, shook greatly, and shook violently; stirred, stirred greatly, and stirred violently; resounded, resounded greatly, and resounded violently; roared, roared greatly, and roared violently; and was disturbed, greatly disturbed, and violently disturbed. The eastern direction rose up and the western direction sank down; the western direction rose up and the eastern direction sank down; the northern direction rose up and the southern direction sank down; the southern direction rose up and the northern direction sank down; the edges rose up and the middle sank down; and the middle rose up and the edges sank down. 
 Then the gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm took up divine sandalwood powders and strewed them near, strewed them in front, strewed them all around the Lord and the elder Subhūti and exclaimed, “Lord, it is amazing how this elder Subhūti takes after the Lord because of the suchness  of the Tathāgata!”
 Then the elder Subhūti, picking up the thread of this conversation with those gods, said to those gods, “Gods, the elder Subhūti does not take after form, does not take after anything other than form, does not take after the suchness of form, and does not take after anything other than the suchness of form. He does not take after feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , or consciousness, does not take after anything other than consciousness, does not take after the suchness of consciousness, and does not take after anything other than the suchness of consciousness. Similarly, connect this with each, up to he does not take after the knowledge of all aspects, does not take after anything other than the knowledge of all aspects, does not take after the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects, and does not take after anything other than the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects. He does not take after the compounded, does not take after anything other than the compounded, does not take after the suchness of the compounded, and does not take after anything other than the suchness of the compounded. He does not take after the uncompounded, does not take after anything other than the uncompounded, does not take after the suchness of the uncompounded, and does not take after anything other than the suchness of the uncompounded. And why? Because the dharma that is taken after, and the dharma that takes after, do not exist and are not apprehended.”
 Then the venerable Śāriputra said to the Lord, “Suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element are deep.  In them you cannot apprehend form, nor can you apprehend the suchness of form; if you cannot apprehend even just form, however could you apprehend the suchness of form? In them you cannot apprehend feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , or consciousness, nor can you apprehend the suchness of consciousness. And if you cannot apprehend even just consciousness, however could you apprehend the suchness of consciousness? Similarly, connect this with each, up to in them you cannot apprehend the knowledge of all aspects, nor can you apprehend the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects. And if you cannot apprehend even just the knowledge of all aspects, however could you apprehend the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects?” 
 “Śāriputra, exactly so! Exactly so!” said the Lord. “Suchness, Śāriputra, is deep. In it you cannot apprehend form, you cannot apprehend the suchness of form. And if you cannot apprehend even just form, however could you apprehend the suchness of form? In it you cannot apprehend feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness, nor can you apprehend the suchness of consciousness. And if you cannot apprehend even just consciousness, however could you apprehend the suchness of consciousness. Similarly, connect this with each, up to you cannot apprehend the knowledge of all aspects, nor can you apprehend the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects. And if you cannot apprehend even just the knowledge of all aspects, however could you apprehend the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects.”
 As this “Suchness, Unmistaken Suchness, Unaltered Suchness” chapter was being expounded, two hundred monks stopped taking hold of anything and their minds were freed from contamination. Dust-free and stainless, the Dharma eye of five hundred nuns became clear about the dharmas.
 Five thousand bodhisattvas gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas. 
 Sixty bodhisattvas lacking in what is necessary stopped taking hold of anything and their minds were freed from contamination. 
 “Śāriputra, those bodhisattvas attended on five hundred buddhas. They gave gifts, guarded morality, cultivated patience, made a vigorous effort, became absorbed in concentration, and cultivated wisdom, but uninformed by the perfection of wisdom and uninformed by skillful means, they practiced thus, thinking, ‘This is to be given. We will give it to them. We will guard this morality. We will cultivate this patience. We will make this vigorous effort. We will become absorbed in this concentration. We will cultivate this wisdom.’ Practicing like that they were separated from the perfection of wisdom and were not assisted by skillful means, so practicing the cultivation of giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom with perceptions of difference, and not apprehending the absence of difference, they did not enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva. And because they did not enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva they reached the result of stream enterer, reached . . . , up to the result of a worthy one.
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, even though those bodhisattva great beings’ path of emptiness, or signlessness, or wishlessness is present, still they are separated from the perfection of wisdom and have not been assisted by skillful means, so, having actualized the very limit of reality, they have become śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.”
 Śāriputra then asked, “Why, Lord, even though they have similarly cultivated just those dharmas—emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness—did those separated from skillful means actualize the very limit of reality and become śrāvakas  and pratyekabuddhas, while those other bodhisattvas, Lord, will, thanks to skillful means, by cultivating just those dharmas—emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness—fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “here some separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, who cultivate emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness without resorting to skillful means, become śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. Śāriputra, here those bodhisattva great beings not separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, thanks to skillful means, cultivate emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness, enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “To illustrate, Śāriputra, a winged bird with a physical body of a hundred yojanas, or a physical body of two hundred yojanas, or three hundred yojanas, or four hundred yojanas, or five hundred yojanas thinks it will come from the Trāyastriṃśa class of gods to this Jambudvīpa, but that bird is one without the proper wings to do it. It thinks, ‘I have to take off from the Trāyastriṃśa class of gods and go to Jambudvīpa,’ but if, halfway to landing on the earth, it has second thoughts—‘Hey! I had better set down in the Trāyastriṃśa class of gods’—what do you think, Śāriputra, would that bird therefore be able to set down in the Trāyastriṃśa class of gods?”
 “No, Lord, it would not be able to,” replied Śāriputra.
 The Lord said, “If it were to think halfway, ‘Hey! I must set down unharmed and uninjured in Jambudvīpa,’ what do you think, Śāriputra,  would that bird set down unharmed and uninjured in Jambudvīpa?”
 “No, Lord, it would not be able to,” replied Śāriputra. “That bird would be harmed or become injured and would suffer death or near death before landing in Jambudvīpa. And why? Because that will happen for sure since its physical body is big, its wings are stunted, and it has taken off from such a high place.” 
 “It is similar, Śāriputra,” continued the Lord, “with bodhisattvas who, for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, give gifts, guard morality, cultivate patience, make an effort at perseverance, and become absorbed in concentration, but are separated from the perfection of wisdom and not assisted by skillful means. Their entrance is bigger, they think a bigger thought, they are assisted by an immeasurable beneficial intention to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, but still they will fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings have given gifts, guarded morality, cultivated patience, made an effort at perseverance, and generated concentration separated from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects. Those bodhisattvas will still be separated from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means and fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level.
“Śāriputra, bodhisattvas who habitually focus thoughts on the morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and seeing of liberation of past, future, and present lord buddhas, who fully retain and make them into causal signs, still do not know the morality, still do not know . . . , up to the knowledge and seeing  of liberation of the tathāgatas, and, without knowing and comprehending, hear the words emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness and grasp the state of peace as a causal sign. Having grasped it as a causal sign they transform it into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. The bodhisattvas who transform it like that will stand on the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. And why? Śāriputra, it is because that is what happens to bodhisattvas separated from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means who dedicate the wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. 
 “Śāriputra, here you should know that when bodhisattva great beings, starting from the production of the first thought, are inseparable from the thought of the knowledge of all aspects, give gifts, guard morality, cultivate patience, make an effort at perseverance, become absorbed in concentration, are not separated from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means, and therefore do not grasp all the morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and seeing of liberation of past, future, and present lord buddhas as causal signs, and do not grasp the emptiness meditative stabilization, signless meditative stabilization, and wishless meditative stabilization as causal signs, then, Śāriputra, they do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings, starting from the production of the first thought, have given gifts but not grasped at a causal sign; have guarded morality, cultivated patience, made an effort at perseverance, become absorbed in concentration, and cultivated wisdom but  not grasped at a causal sign; have not grasped at the morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, freedom, or knowledge and seeing of liberation of past, future, and present lord buddhas as causal signs; and have not grasped the emptiness meditative stabilization, signless meditative stabilization, or wishless meditative stabilization as causal signs either. Thus, Śāriputra, the practice without having grasped at causal signs, with a mind separated from causal signs of giving gifts, guarding morality, cultivating patience, making an effort at perseverance, becoming absorbed in concentration, and cultivating wisdom, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects is the bodhisattva great beings’ skillful means.” 
 “Lord,” said Śāriputra, “the way I understand the meaning of what you, Lord, have said is that the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of bodhisattva great beings who, starting from the production of the first thought, are not separated from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means is not open to doubt. And why? Lord, it is because those bodhisattva great beings, starting from the production of the first thought, do not apprehend any dharma that might fully awaken, or through which there might be full awakening, nor any form that might be awakened to, nor any feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, nor . . . , similarly, up to the knowledge of all aspects that might be awakened to. 
 “And Lord, it should be known that the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle separated from the perfection of wisdom and separated from skillful means is doubtful. Why? Lord, it is because whatever gifts those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle separated from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means  have bestowed, they bestowed them all having grasped at a causal sign, and because whatever morality they guarded . . . , patience they cultivated . . . , perseverance they made an effort at . . . , or concentrations they became absorbed in, they became absorbed in them all too having grasped at a causal sign. The unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle should be known as doubtful because of that.
 “Therefore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want to awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should be aware not to be separated from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means. They should stand in the perfection of wisdom and skillful means and should bestow gifts, should guard morality, should cultivate patience, should make an effort at perseverance, should become absorbed in concentration, and should cultivate wisdom by way of not apprehending anything, with a mind endowed with signlessness. They should practice . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects like that.”
 Then the gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm said to the Lord, “Lord, it is going to be hard for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to come about for bodhisattva great beings. They have to want to awaken fully to all dharmas but those dharmas do not exist and cannot be apprehended.”
 “Exactly so, gods!” said the Lord. “It is going to be hard for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to come about. Gods! Even though I have fully awakened to all dharmas in all their aspects, still I did not apprehend any dharma that might fully awaken, or through which I might fully awaken, or any dharma  I might awaken to. And why? Gods, it is because all dharmas are absolutely pure.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, you have said, ‘It is going to be hard for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to come about.’ The way I understand the meaning of what you, Lord, have said, the way it occurs to me, is that the full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening must be easy. And why? Because there is nobody who fully awakens, and there is nothing that is fully awakened to, so all dharmas are empty, and where all dharmas are empty, any dharma that might fully awaken, through which there might be full awakening, or to which they might awaken does not exist. And why? Lord, it is because any dharma that will increase or decrease, any dharma to be bestowed, up to any concentration to become absorbed in, any dharma . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects to practice does not exist. Somebody who might fully awaken, something through which there might be full awakening, and something to be fully awakened to—all those dharmas are empty. In this way, Lord, it must be easy for bodhisattva great beings to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Lord, it is because form is empty of an intrinsic nature of form; feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness is empty of an intrinsic nature of consciousness; and similarly, up to the knowledge of all aspects is empty of an intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra said to venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, according to this one of many explanations, the full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening must be hard. And why? Venerable Subhūti, it is because it would not occur to space to think, ‘I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ Similarly, Venerable Subhūti, it would not occur to bodhisattva great beings to think, ‘I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ And why? Because all dharmas are like space, and yet, while still believing all dharmas are like space, bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. If bodhisattva great beings do not believe that dharmas are like space, but still it is easy to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, full awakening would not be hard, and bodhisattvas, as many of them as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, would not turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Therefore, Venerable Subhūti, according to this one of many explanations, the full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening must be hard. It is obvious full awakening is not easy.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked venerable Śāriputra, “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, does form turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No it does not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Do you think feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness turn back from unsurpassed,  perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No they do not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
Similarly, connect this with each, up to “Do you think suchness turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No it does not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, is the dharma that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening other than form?”
 “No it is not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Do you think the dharma that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is other than feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness?”
 “No it is not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
Similarly, connect this with each, up to “Do you think the dharma that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is other than the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No it is not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, is it the suchness of form that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, up to is it the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No it is not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, is the dharma that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening other than the suchness of form?”
 “No it is not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
Similarly, “Do you think the dharma that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is other than . . . , up to the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No it is not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, does suchness turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No it does not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think,  does the true nature of dharmas turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Do you think the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, or the inconceivable element turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No they do not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, is the dharma that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening other than suchness?”
 “No it is not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, is the dharma that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening other than . . . , up to the inconceivable element?”
 “No it is not, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “So, since as things stand in truth these dharmas cannot be apprehended, what then is that dharma that turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, venerable Śāriputra said to him, “According to the way things are in the elder Subhūti’s teaching there is no bodhisattva great being who turns back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and therefore there will be no presentation of the awakenings of those three persons to do with the Bodhisattva Vehicle—those three persons to do with the Bodhisattva Vehicle about whom the Tathāgata has given an explanation. According to the elder Subhūti’s teaching, bodhisattva great beings will be this—namely, in just a single Bodhisattva Vehicle.”
 Then venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra said to venerable Śāriputra, “Venerable Śāriputra, you must ask the elder Subhūti whether the elder Subhūti accepts even a single awakening.” 
 Venerable Śāriputra then asked of venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, do you accept that there is a bodhisattva great being  in the Buddha Vehicle?”
 Venerable Subhūti asked venerable Śāriputra in return, “Venerable Śāriputra, do you accept that in suchness there are three bodhisattvas: the bodhisattva in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the bodhisattva in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the bodhisattva in the Buddha Vehicle?”
 “No, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in suchness can you apprehend three bodhisattvas?”
 “No, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, can suchness be apprehended as one type, or two types, or three types?”
 “No, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, in suchness can you apprehended even one bodhisattva?”
 “No, Venerable Subhūti,” he replied.
 Venerable Subhūti then said, “So, since as things stand in truth these dharmas cannot be apprehended, what, Venerable Śāriputra, made you think, ‘This bodhisattva is in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, this bodhisattva is in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and this bodhisattva is in the Buddha Vehicle’?
 “Thus, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings whose minds are not cowed, who do not tense up, and who do not experience regret when bodhisattva great beings categorized in terms of the suchness of all dharmas are not specifically qualified—they will go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Then the Lord said to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, your confident readiness to explain like this through the Buddha’s might is excellent! Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings whose minds are not cowed, who do not tense up, and who do not experience regret—who do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when bodhisattva great beings categorized in terms of the suchness of all dharmas are not specifically qualified—  those bodhisattva great beings will go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked the Lord, “Lord, to which awakening will bodhisattva great beings with such qualities as those go forth?”
 “Śāriputra,” replied the Lord, “those bodhisattva great beings will go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening stand?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings stand with a thought that makes all beings equal: ‘I must produce a balanced thought toward all beings, not produce an unbalanced thought. I must focus on all beings with a balanced thought, not focus on all beings with an unbalanced thought. I must generate great love and great compassion for all beings. I must focus on all beings with great love. I must not focus on any beings callously. I must stop feeling superior to any beings. I must focus on all beings without being devious. I must produce a thought to be of benefit to all beings, not produce a thought to harm them. I must focus on all beings with a thought to benefit them, not focus on them with a thought to harm them. I must produce a thought that I am not offended by any beings, not produce a thought that I am offended. I must produce a thought not to injure any beings, not produce a thought to injure them. I must focus on all beings with a thought not to injure them,  not focus on them with a thought to injure them. I must produce a thought that all beings are mothers. I must produce a thought that all beings are brothers, sisters, friends, kinsmen, and blood relatives. I must focus on all beings with the thought they are mothers. I must focus on all beings with the thought they are brothers, sisters, friends, kinsmen, up to blood relatives.
 “ ‘I must stop killing, I must inspire others to stop killing, I must speak in praise of stopping killing, and I must speak in praise of others stopping killing as well, welcoming it.
 “ ‘I must stop stealing, I must inspire others to stop stealing, I must speak in praise of stopping stealing, and I must speak in praise of others stopping stealing as well, welcoming it.
 “ ‘I must stop illicit sex because of lust, I must inspire others to stop illicit sex because of lust, I must speak in praise of stopping illicit sex because of lust, and I must speak in praise of others stopping illicit sex because of lust as well, welcoming it.’
 “That is how bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should stand.
Similarly, “ ‘I must stop . . . up to wrong view, I must inspire others to stop wrong view, I must speak in praise of stopping wrong view, and I must speak in praise of others stopping wrong view as well, welcoming it.’
 “That is how bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should stand.
 “ ‘I must become absorbed in the first concentration, I must inspire others to become absorbed in the first concentration, I must speak in praise of becoming absorbed in the first concentration,  and I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in the first concentration as well, welcoming it. Similarly, I must become absorbed in . . . up to the fourth concentration, up to I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in . . . up to the fourth concentration as well, welcoming it.’
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening must become absorbed in loving-kindness, up to ‘I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in loving-kindness as well, welcoming it. I must do the same with compassion, joy, and equanimity as well.
 “ ‘I must become absorbed in the station of endless space. Similarly, up to I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in the station of endless space as well, welcoming it. I must do the same with . . . up to the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption.
 “ ‘I must complete the perfection of giving, I must inspire others to take up the perfection of giving, I must speak in praise of the perfection of giving, and I must speak in praise of others completing the perfection of giving as well, welcoming it. I must complete . . . up to the perfection of wisdom, I must inspire others to take up the perfection of wisdom, I must speak in praise of the perfection of wisdom, and I must speak in praise of others completing the perfection of wisdom as well, welcoming it.’ 
 “That is how bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should stand.
 “ ‘I must become absorbed in inner emptiness, I must inspire others to become absorbed in inner emptiness, I must speak in praise of inner emptiness, and I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in inner emptiness as well, welcoming it. Similarly, I must become absorbed in . . . up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, I must inspire others to become absorbed in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, I must speak in praise of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature as well, welcoming it. 
 “ ‘I must cultivate the four applications of mindfulness, I must inspire others to take up the applications of mindfulness, I must speak in praise of the applications of mindfulness, and I must speak in praise of others cultivating the applications of mindfulness as well, welcoming it. I must do the same with . . . up to the eightfold noble path.
 “ ‘I must become absorbed in the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization, I must inspire others to take up the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization, I must speak in praise of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization, and I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization as well, welcoming it. 
 “ ‘I must become absorbed in the eight deliverances, I must inspire others to take up the eight deliverances, I must speak in praise  of the eight deliverances, and I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in the eight deliverances as well, welcoming it. 
 “ ‘I must complete the ten tathāgata powers, I must inspire others to take up the ten tathāgata powers, I must speak in praise of the ten tathāgata powers, and I must speak in praise of others completing the ten tathāgata powers as well, welcoming it. Similarly, I must complete the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, and great compassion. I must inspire others to take up . . . up to great love, and great compassion, I must speak in praise of great compassion, and I must speak in praise of others completing great compassion as well, welcoming it. 
 “ ‘I must become absorbed in dependent origination in the order in which it unfolds and in the order in which it does not unfold, I must inspire others to take up dependent origination in the order in which it unfolds and in the order in which it does not unfold, I must speak in praise of dependent origination, and I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in dependent origination as well, welcoming it.’
 “That is how bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should stand.
 “ ‘I must comprehend suffering. I must abandon origination. I must actualize cessation. I must cultivate the path. I must inspire others to take up the comprehension of suffering, the abandoning of origination, the actualization of cessation,  and the cultivation of the path. I must speak in praise of the comprehension of suffering, up to the cultivation of the path, and I must speak in praise of others becoming absorbed in the comprehension of suffering, the abandoning of origination, the actualization of cessation, and the cultivation of the path as well, welcoming it. 
 “ ‘I must produce knowledge to actualize the knowledge that is the result of stream enterer, but I should not actualize the very limit of reality. I must inspire others to actualize the knowledge that is the result of stream enterer. I must produce knowledge to actualize the knowledge that is the result of once-returner, but I should not actualize the very limit of reality. I must inspire others to actualize the knowledge that is the result of once-returner. I must produce knowledge to actualize the knowledge that is the result of non-returner, but I should not actualize the very limit of reality. I must inspire others to actualize the knowledge that is the result of non-returner. I must produce knowledge to actualize the knowledge that is the state of a worthy one, but I should not actualize the very limit of reality. I must inspire others to actualize the knowledge that is the state of a worthy one. I must enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, I must inspire others to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, I must speak in praise of the secure state of a bodhisattva, and I must speak in praise of others entering into the secure state of a bodhisattva as well, welcoming it.’ 
 “That is how bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should stand.
 “ ‘I must bring beings to maturity, I must inspire others to bring beings to maturity, I must speak in praise of bringing beings to maturity, and I must speak in praise of others bringing beings to maturity as well, welcoming it. I must purify a buddhafield, I must inspire others to purify a buddhafield, I must speak in praise of purifying a buddhafield, and I must speak in praise of others purifying a buddhafield as well, welcoming it. I must produce a bodhisattva’s clairvoyance, I must inspire others to produce a bodhisattva’s clairvoyance, I must speak in praise of producing a bodhisattva’s clairvoyance, and I must speak in praise of others producing a bodhisattva’s clairvoyance as well, welcoming it. I must produce the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, I must inspire others to take up the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, I must speak in praise of the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, and I must speak in praise of others producing the knowledge of a knower of all aspects as well, welcoming it. I must eliminate all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions. I must inspire others to eliminate all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions. I must speak in praise of knowledge of the elimination of all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions, and I must speak in praise of others eliminating all residual impressions, connections,  and afflictions as well, welcoming it.’
 “Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should stand.
 “ ‘I must take possession of a perfect lifespan. I must inspire others to have a perfect lifespan. I must speak in praise of having a perfect lifespan, and I must speak in praise of others taking possession of a perfect lifespan as well, welcoming it. I must make sure the good doctrine lasts. I must inspire others to make sure the good doctrine lasts. I must speak in praise of making sure the good doctrine lasts, and I must speak in praise of others making sure the good doctrine lasts as well, welcoming it.’
 “Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings who want to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should stand. That is how bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of wisdom and skillful means. Training like that, standing like that, their form will be without obscuration; their feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness will also be without obscuration. Similarly, connect this with each, up to the lasting of the doctrine will be without obscuration. And why? Because even in the past those bodhisattva great beings did not seize form; did not seize feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; and similarly, did not seize . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because even that form that has not been seized is not form, and similarly, up to even that knowledge of all aspects that has not been seized is not  the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 During this exposition of the positioning of the bodhisattva, two thousand bodhisattvas gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas. 
This was the forty-eighth chapter, “A Presentation of the Bodhisattvas’ Training,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 49: Irreversibility
The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti inquired of him, “Lord, what is the attribute, what is the token, and what is the sign of irreversible bodhisattva great beings? How do I know, ‘These bodhisattva great beings are irreversible?’ ”
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here what are called the level of ordinary persons, the level of śrāvakas, the level of pratyekabuddhas, the level of bodhisattvas, and the level of tathāgatas—all of them are suchness, unchanging, undifferentiated, not two, and not divided. They enter into that suchness just as it is. Thus, they do not differentiate the undifferentiated and thus enter into it. Those who have entered like that, having heard about suchness just as it is, having transcended it, have no doubt at all that they are not each separate from suchness, and are not both different and suchness. They do not say whatever just comes into their minds, their words are meaningful, and they do not talk nonsense. They are not concerned with what others have and have not done; they search for what has been well spoken. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings who have those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.”
 “Lord, through what attributes,  what tokens, and what signs should you know that bodhisattva great beings are irreversible?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “all dharmas are without attributes, without tokens, and without signs.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, if all dharmas are without attributes, without tokens, and without signs, what are the dharmas bodhisattva great beings do not turn away from again, on account of which they are taught to be ‘irreversible’? 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “you should know that bodhisattva great beings who have turned away from form, and who have turned away from feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, are, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings who have turned away from the perfection of giving, up to the perfection of wisdom; from inner emptiness, up to emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; from the applications of mindfulness, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and who have turned away from the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level, up to awakening, are, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings. And why? Subhūti, it is because a form where a bodhisattva might be located is without an intrinsic nature. Similarly, connect this with each, up to an awakening where a bodhisattva might be located is without an intrinsic nature.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not look up to others outside the fold—those following a secluded religious life, and brahmins; they do not think those following a secluded religious life or brahmins know what needs to be known, see what needs to be seen, or expound an exposition  of right view. There is no doubt about that, it is impossible. They do not grasp rules and rituals as absolute; they do not fall into a bad view; they do not hold that a spectacle or an auspicious sign makes for cleanliness; and they do not bow down to other gods, nor do they think they should give them flowers, or garlands, or incense, or creams, or powders, or clothes, or parasols, or flags, or banners. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are not born in hell, up to they are not born in the eight places that preclude a perfect human birth, and they do not take on being a woman. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings have taken to heart and stand on the ten wholesome actions: ‘I have stopped stealing, I inspire others to stop stealing, I speak in praise of stopping stealing, and I speak in praise of others stopping stealing as well, welcoming it. And similarly, up to wrong view.’ Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings do not ply the ten unwholesome actions even in a dream, let alone when awake. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when irreversible bodhisattva great beings  pursue the perfection of giving they give the gift for the sake of all beings. And similarly, up to when they cultivate wisdom. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when irreversible bodhisattva great beings give a gift of Dharma—a discourse, melodious narration, prediction, up to tale, or exposition—a Dharma they study, they think, ‘Through this gift of Dharma, may the intention of all beings be completed.’ Having made that gift of Dharma into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are not unsure, not of two minds, and do not doubt the deep dharmas.” 
 “Lord, why are irreversible bodhisattva great beings not unsure, not of two minds, and why do they not doubt the deep dharmas?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “it is because irreversible bodhisattva great beings do not see any dharma about which they are unsure, or of two minds, or that they doubt at all. They also do not see form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness. And similarly, up to they also do not see awakening. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are endowed with gentle physical action, are endowed with gentle verbal action, and gentle mental action. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are constantly and always endowed with loving physical action, are endowed with loving verbal action, and loving mental action. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings do not cohabit with five obscurations—namely, desire for sense gratification, malice, drowsiness and dozing, gross mental excitement and uneasiness, and doubt. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings do not have bad proclivities in any way at all. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, be it the going out or the coming back, irreversible bodhisattva great beings’ thoughts do not veer off when going out and their thoughts do not veer off when coming back. Whether going out or coming back, they go applying mindfulness and come back applying mindfulness. Mindful they go out and mindful they come back; mindful they walk, mindful they pause, mindful they sit, and mindful they rest. They are not too hasty in picking up their foot and not too hasty in putting their foot down; mindful they pick their foot up and mindful they put their foot down.  They traverse the area while looking at the ground. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings’ use of robes is impeccable. Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are habitually clean, do not smell bad, are not dusty and dirty, and do not get sick often. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, those eighty thousand maggot families in the bodies of human beings who feed on those bodies are not in the bodies of irreversible bodhisattva great beings as anything at all in any way at all. And why? Subhūti, it is because the wholesome roots of irreversible bodhisattva great beings rise up above everything ordinary. Therefore those eighty thousand maggot families are not in the bodhisattva great beings’ bodies. 
 “Subhūti, as those wholesome roots of the bodhisattva great beings keep on growing, the bodhisattva great beings appropriate a purer and purer body, and appropriate purer and purer speech and mind. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti asked him, “How are the bodhisattva great beings’ bodies pure, speech pure, and mind pure?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “as those wholesome roots  of bodhisattva great beings keep on growing, those wholesome roots make bodhisattva great beings’ crooked bodies, speech, and minds, and their devious bodies, speech, and minds, purer and purer, and they conduct themselves more and more with the three types of good conduct to do with the body, with the four types of good conduct to do with speech, and with the three types of good conduct to do with the mind. This, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ pure bodies, pure speech, and pure minds. With those pure bodies, pure speech, and pure minds they transcend the śrāvaka level and pratyekabuddha level but do not actualize the very limit of reality. This too, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ pure bodies, pure speech, and pure minds. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are not attached to wealth and respect, are not attached to food, are not even focused on . . . up to being a three-robe wearer, but still they undertake and keep on at those twelve qualities of the ascetic. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings do not produce a miserly thought, do not produce an immoral thought, do not produce an emotionally upsetting thought, do not produce a lazy thought, do not produce an uncollected thought, do not produce an intellectually confused thought, and do not produce a jealous thought. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs  are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings have a steady intellect, a profound intellect, listen to the doctrine from others with respect, and whatever doctrine they have heard from others they merge it all with the perfection of wisdom, and thanks to the perfection of wisdom they merge all the ordinary things that have to be done with the true nature of dharmas. There is no dharma at all that they view as not united with the dharma-constituent; they view them all as united with the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, you should know that marks bodhisattva great beings as irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one magically produces the eight great hells in the presence of irreversible bodhisattva great beings and in each of the great hells also magically produces many thousands of bodhisattvas, many hundred thousand bodhisattvas, many hundred thousand one hundred million billion bodhisattvas being burned and cooked, experiencing unbearable, sharp, grating sufferings, and says to them, ‘The Tathāgata has prophesied these bodhisattva great beings, all of them, to be irreversible from awakening, and yet they have been born in these hells. The Tathāgata’s prophecy that you too are irreversible is a prophecy to do with hell, so from now on let go of this thought of awakening. Then you will not be born in hell; you will on that account go to heaven instead.’ When Māra says that, if those bodhisattva great beings’ thought is not disturbed, if they do not harbor doubt, you should know that those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas of the past prophesied those bodhisattva great beings. Those bodhisattva great beings  stand certain in the irreversible element. Subhūti, it is impossible that there is any chance the bodhisattvas irreversible from awakening will be born in hell, or in the animal world, or in the world of Yama. It is impossible. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if Māra the wicked one comes into the presence of bodhisattva great beings disguised in the form of a follower of the secluded religious life and says, ‘Repudiate what you have heard before—namely, that “I must thus cleanse the perfection of giving, up to I must thus cleanse the perfection of wisdom, up to I must thus cleanse the knowledge of all aspects,” and that “I must fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” Confess and reject your rejoicings in all those wholesome roots of past, future, and present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas with their śrāvaka saṅghas, starting from the first production of the thought, up to the lasting of the good Dharma. What if you were somebody who confesses and rejects those wholesome roots? What you have heard is not the word of the Buddha, it is personally made up by rhymesters. I will tell you those words of the Buddha the Tathāgata has spoken.’ If, when Māra says that, those bodhisattva great beings are disturbed, are unsure, harbor doubt, then you should know that the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas of the past did not prophesy those bodhisattva great beings, and those bodhisattva great beings do not stand certain  in the irreversible element. But if those bodhisattva great beings are not disturbed, are not unsure, do not harbor doubt, fall back on the true nature of dharmas, and fall back on the absence of occasioning anything, and on the absence of production; do not believe in another; and do not place their trust in another when it comes to the perfection of giving, up to the perfection of wisdom, and do not place their trust in another when it comes to awakening, then those bodhisattva great beings stand certain in the irreversible element and do not believe in another. If, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening cannot be crushed by those in the Śrāvaka Vehicle or in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle and are irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, just like worthy ones with outflows dried up directly witnessing the true nature of dharmas do not believe in another and are not captured by Māra the wicked one, then, Subhūti, never mind that they do not believe in tīrthika religious mendicants, never mind that they do not believe in those in the Śrāvaka Vehicle or in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle or in Māra the wicked one, they do not even place their trust in the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha. It is impossible. And why? Because they do not see any dharma at all in which to believe, and because they do not see form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness, or the suchness of form, up to or the suchness of consciousness. And similarly, up to they do not see awakening, and they do not see the suchness of awakening. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those reasons, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one comes into the presence of bodhisattva great beings disguised in the form of a monk  and says, ‘This way of life has to do with saṃsāra; it is not a way of life to do with the knowledge of all aspects, so you should put an end to suffering right here.’ Māra the wicked one teaches the bodhisattva great beings a counterfeit path, a counterfeit path purified of the ordinary aspects of ways of life to do with saṃsāra, or else teaches them the perception of dry bones, or else gives instruction in the first concentration, up to the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption. ‘Venerable, this is the path, and this is the way you progress. It is the path and the way you progress to reach the result of stream enterer, up to the state of a worthy one. Venerable, you should put an end to suffering right here with this path and way of progressing and not experience the sufferings of a way of life in saṃsāra anymore. Hey! Consider why, if your body has not been brought into being right here, you would appropriate another body.’ Subhūti, if the bodhisattva great beings’ minds are not disturbed, are not shaken even when Māra says that, and if, on top of that they think, ‘This monk is a boon to me showing me this counterfeit path. It is a counterfeit path that does not even work for the realization of the result of stream enterer, up to the state of a worthy one, does not even work for the realization of a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and does not work for the realization of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening either.’ And if, on top of that, again pleasure rises up in them, thinking, ‘This monk who shows me those attachments is a boon to me. Having fully comprehended those attachments I will train in all three paths,’ Māra the wicked one, knowing pleasure has arisen in those bodhisattva great beings, again talks to them, saying, ‘Son of a good family,  do you want to have a look at those bodhisattva great beings who have served as many lord buddhas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River with what they require—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—who have completed the perfection of giving, up to have cultivated the perfection of wisdom in the presence of as many tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, those bodhisattva great beings who, having attended on as many lord buddhas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, make inquiries on the topic of just that Bodhisattva Vehicle, asking, “How do you stand in the Bodhisattva Vehicle practicing the perfection of giving, and similarly, practicing up to the perfection of wisdom, practicing the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and path, and similarly, up to great compassion, and up to the knowledge of all aspects?” Those bodhisattva great beings have lived in accord, practiced in accord, and made an effort in accord with what those lord buddhas have taught but still they have not yet fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. If those who have been given advice like that, been instructed like that, lived like that, trained over and over again like that have still not reached the knowledge of all aspects, how could someone like you ever reach unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’ If, even after having been dissuaded that like, the thought of those bodhisattva great beings is not changed; if they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified; and if,  on top of that, pleasure rises up in them, thinking, ‘This monk is a boon to me. He shows me those attachments on account of which even the result of stream enterer is not attained, and similarly, up to even the knowledge of all aspects is not attained,’ then Māra the wicked one, knowing the minds of those bodhisattva great beings are uncowed, magically produces a great many monks in that very place and again says, ‘All of these are worthy ones with outflows dried up. If they have not set forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, but rather abide in the state of a worthy one, how could someone like you ever fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’ If even so those bodhisattva great beings still think, ‘Hey! This is Māra the wicked one! He is teaching a counterfeit path!’, then those bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, are irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. On top of that, they think, ‘It is impossible that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving, up to cultivating the knowledge of a knower of all aspects will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. There is no chance, it is impossible.’ Then you should know, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if it occurs to irreversible bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘Those who have trained in, and are not separated from, the way of life in accord with what the Tathāgata has explained, with attention connected to the perfections,  do not lack what is necessary for the perfection of giving, and similarly, up to do not lack what is necessary for the knowledge of all aspects,’ you should know, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if it occurs to irreversible bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘Those who comprehend the works of Māra will not be lacking in what is necessary for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ you should know, Subhūti, that the bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “From what do irreversible bodhisattva great beings have to be irreversible in order to be known to be irreversible?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “they turn back from the perception of form, turn back from the perception of feeling, turn back from the perception of perception, turn back from the perception of volitional factors, and turn back from the perception of consciousness; and they turn back from the perception of constituents, the perception of sense fields, the perception of greed, the perception of hate, the perception of confusion, the perception of views, the perception of perfections, the perception of emptinesses, and the perception of applications of mindfulness; and similarly, the perception of śrāvaka, and perception of pratyekabuddha, up to they turn back from the perception of buddha. And why? Because all dharmas are empty of their own mark, so irreversible bodhisattva great beings enter  into the secure state of a bodhisattva. They do not apprehend even just a very tiny dharma, so they do not occasion anything, and because they do not occasion anything, they do not produce it. They are called irreversible bodhisattva great beings ‘who have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas.’ Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from awakening.”
This was the forty-ninth chapter, “Irreversibility,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 50: Teaching the Signs of Irreversibility
“Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one comes into the presence of bodhisattva great beings and discourages them, saying, ‘The knowledge of all aspects is like space; it is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and it is empty of its own mark. These dharmas are like space as well; they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and they are empty of their own marks. In dharmas that are like space with a nonexistent intrinsic nature and empty of their own marks, you cannot apprehend any dharma at all which might fully awaken, through which you might fully awaken, and which will be fully awakened to. All those dharmas are like space with a nonexistent intrinsic nature and empty of their own marks, so this—namely, this teaching that you should fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—will frustrate you. It is meaningless, it is the work of Māra, it is not a teaching of the perfectly complete buddha. Son of a good family, reject those ways of thinking or else they will bring you misfortune and suffering and a descent into error.’
 “There, when he says that, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family, having heard those words, think, ‘In this case we have to look closely. These are the works of Māra causing a separation from unsurpassed,  perfect, complete awakening. Thus, dharmas are like space with a nonexistent intrinsic nature and are empty of their own marks. Beings do not know, do not see, and do not comprehend them, so we, having buckled on the space-like armor with a nonexistent intrinsic nature empty of its own mark, having fully awakened to the knowledge of all aspects, will teach the doctrine that provides a definite escape. We will establish them in the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the state of a worthy one. We will establish them in the state of a pratyekabuddha, and we will establish them in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ 
 “There, starting from their first production of the thought, when bodhisattva great beings hear those doctrines they must be firm in their thought, must be unwavering in their thought, and must not be robbed of their thought. If, endowed with a firm thought, an unwavering thought, a thought that cannot be stolen, they practice the six perfections, they will enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, do you call bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening ‘irreversible,’ or do you call bodhisattvas who turns back ‘irreversible’?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattvas are said to ‘turn back,’ and bodhisattvas who turn back are said to be ‘irreversible.’ ”
 “Lord, why are irreversible bodhisattvas said to ‘turn back,’ and why are bodhisattvas who turn back said to be ‘irreversible’?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the bodhisattvas  who have turned back from the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, Subhūti, are the bodhisattvas who have turned back who are said to be ‘irreversible.’ Subhūti, the bodhisattvas who have not turned back from the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, Subhūti, are the irreversible bodhisattva who are said to have ‘turned back.’
 “You should know, Subhūti, that being endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs, bodhisattva great beings are marked as irreversible from awakening. Māra the wicked one cannot dissuade bodhisattvas endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening become absorbed when and as they want to in the first concentration, up to become absorbed in the fourth concentration, up to become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings become absorbed when and as they want to in the four applications of mindfulness, up to become absorbed in the eightfold noble path, up to become absorbed in the meditative stabilization on emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness. They accomplish the five clairvoyances; gain mastery over the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, and the cessation absorption; cultivate all four applications of mindfulness; and similarly, become absorbed in . . . up to the eightfold noble path and in the meditative stabilization on emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness; and accomplish the five clairvoyances, but still they do not appropriate the result of the concentrations, and similarly, up to do not appropriate the result of the cessation absorption, do not gain the result  of stream enterer, and similarly, up to do not gain a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. When and as they want to, and at will, they appropriate a body. That is, they appropriate a body with which they can work for the welfare of beings. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from awakening.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings endowed with attention to awakening, inseparable from the thought of awakening, do not focus on form, do not focus on a mark, do not focus on the body, do not focus on giving, and similarly, up to do not focus on wisdom, do not focus on the concentrations, do not focus on the immeasurables, do not focus on the formless absorptions, do not focus on the clairvoyant knowledges, do not focus on the tathāgata powers, do not focus on the fearlessnesses, up to do not focus on awakening, do not focus on the purification of a buddhafield, do not focus on bringing beings to maturity, do not focus on seeing the buddhas, and do not focus on growing wholesome roots. And why? Because those dharmas are like space; they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature and they are empty of their own marks. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening are endowed with this attention to being a bodhisattva while carrying themselves in all four ways. Whether going out or coming back, they do not come back with their thoughts veering off and do not go out with their thoughts veering off. They do not stand up with their thoughts veering off, they do not walk with their thoughts veering off, they do not sit down with their thoughts veering off, and they do not lie down with their thoughts veering off. Mindful they come back, and mindful they go, walk, stand, sit, and lie down. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens,  and those signs are irreversible from awakening.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings living the life of a householder make a show of the five sorts of sense objects through skillful means in order to bring beings to maturity. They give gifts to beings, they give food to those seeking food, up to they give whatever human requirements are appropriate. They personally practice the perfection of giving, and they inspire others to practice the perfection of giving, speak in praise of practicing the perfection of giving, and speak in praise of others practicing the perfection of giving as well, welcoming it. Similarly, connect this with they speak in praise of others practicing . . . up to the perfection of wisdom as well, welcoming it.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening living the life of a householder give the gift of the world filled up with the seven precious stones, up to give the gift of this great billionfold world system filled up with the seven precious stones, but without making use of sense objects, constantly and always practicing celibacy, without oppressing anyone by unleashing the oppression that causes others mental distress. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from awakening.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi, with the thought, ‘Before long this bodhisattva great being will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ constantly and always shadows those irreversible bodhisattva great beings, to guard and protect them just like he shadows me, the unsurpassed, perfectly complete buddha.  As long as the five vajra families are constantly and always shadowing them, humans and nonhumans cannot oppress them, and nobody, in truth, in this world—the gods, or Māras, or brahmins—can withstand them. Their thought does not become distracted from attention to awakening up to and including when fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Those bodhisattvas’ faculties—namely, the eye faculty, up to the thinking-mind faculty, faith faculty, perseverance faculty, mindfulness faculty, meditative stabilization faculty, and wisdom faculty—are not incomplete. They are good people. They do not become dishonorable people.”
 “What, Lord, makes bodhisattva great beings good people, not dishonorable people?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “to the extent the thought of awakening of bodhisattva great beings does not waver, to that extent they are good people, not dishonorable people.
 “Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from awakening.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings paying attention in those ways to being a bodhisattva do not, as anyone at all in any way at all, make use of, or get somebody else to make use of, spells, magical formulas, medicines, or herbs to procure women by casting a spell over them. They do not do anything at all to procure women by casting a spell over them. They do not demonstrate the miracle of foretelling what will happen to a man or a woman: ‘It is going to be a boy,’ ‘It is going to be a girl,’ ‘Your family line will flourish,’ ‘You are going to live long.’ And why? Subhūti, it is because those bodhisattva great beings do not see in phenomena that are empty of their own marks any causal signs, and because they do not see any causal signs, they live by a pure livelihood. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from awakening. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, listen well and hard and pay attention, and I will speak to you about attributes, tokens, and signs—those attributes, tokens, and signs endowed with which irreversible bodhisattva great beings should know that irreversible bodhisattva great beings are irreversible from awakening.”
Venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Indeed I will,” and listened to the Lord accordingly.
The Lord said, “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom inseparable from paying attention in those ways to being a bodhisattva are not preoccupied with aggregates, and are not preoccupied with constituents and sense fields. Why? Because they stand in emptiness and so do not see any dharma that is inferior or superior. 
“They are not preoccupied with talk about robbers. Why? Because where dharmas are empty of their own marks, they do not see a staying together or a stealing away of any dharma. 
“They are not preoccupied with talk about armies. Why? Because standing in the emptiness of a basic nature, they do not see a state of less or a state of more in any dharma. 
“They are not preoccupied with talk about a battle that is underway.  Why? Because all dharmas abide in suchness, so they do not see attachment or rage in any dharma. 
“They are not preoccupied with talk about settlements. Why? Because standing in the emptiness of all dharmas, they do not see an accumulation or nonaccumulation in any dharma. 
“They are not preoccupied with talk about villages. Why? Because standing in the emptiness of space, they do not see a collection or what is not a collection in any dharma. 
“They are not preoccupied with talk about market towns. Why? Because standing at the very limit of reality, they do not see an increase or reduction in any dharma. 
“They are not preoccupied with talk about self, and similarly, up to they are not preoccupied with talk about one who knows and one who sees. Why? Because all dharmas are absolutely pure. 
“More than anything else, inseparable from attention connected with . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects, they stay preoccupied with talk about the perfection of wisdom. 
“They stand in all six perfections. Practicing the perfection of giving they do not live preoccupied with miserliness; practicing the perfection of morality they do not live preoccupied with immorality; practicing the perfection of patience they do not live preoccupied with upsets; practicing the perfection of perseverance they do not live preoccupied with laziness; practicing the perfection of concentration they do not live preoccupied with distraction; and practicing the perfection of wisdom they do not live preoccupied with intellectual confusion. Living with the emptiness of all dharmas  they want just the Dharma, not what is not the Dharma. Involved with the dharma-constituent they do not praise a dharma that can be broken down. They accept the lord buddhas and the bodhisattva great beings as their spiritual friends; inspire Śrāvaka Vehicle and Pratyekabuddha Vehicle sons of a good family and daughters of a good family to take up, enter into, be led into, and be established in full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; please the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas and, to behold them, are born where they are dwelling and maintaining themselves. They are born there when and as they want, and they stay with that attention day and night, that is, with the attention to the buddhas. 
“And why? Subhūti, it is because, in general, bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening produce attention associated with the desire realm, stand on the ten wholesome actions, and are born in those buddhafields where the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have manifested and are dwelling and maintaining themselves; they produce the first concentration, up to become absorbed in the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption; and they are born in those buddhafields where the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have manifested and are dwelling and maintaining themselves. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from awakening. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom and standing in inner emptiness, up to standing in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; and standing in the applications  of mindfulness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to standing in the emptiness, signless, and wishless gateways to liberation do not harbor any doubt about whether ‘I am irreversible from awakening,’ or ‘I am not irreversible from awakening.’ They are not unsure about their level. And why? Because they do not see even a mere tiny dharma that is irreversible or that is not irreversible. For example, Subhūti, those standing at the level of the result of stream enterer are not unsure and do not harbor any doubt about their own level. Similarly, connect this with each, up to those standing at the buddha level are not unsure and do not harbor any doubt. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing on their own level are not unsure and do not harbor any doubt about it either. Standing on that irreversible level they purify a buddhafield, bring beings to maturity, comprehend whatever works of Māra come up, do not come under the control of the works of Māra, and, having comprehended all theworks of Māra, pulverize them to bits. To illustrate, Subhūti, those who commit an inexpiable sin do not separate from the thought of that inexpiable sin up until death. The thought of their inexpiable sin haunts them and they cannot shake themselves free of the thought of the inexpiable sin in any way at all. They are obsessed with the thought up until they die. Similarly, Subhūti, with irreversible bodhisattva great beings’ irreversible thought—it cannot be differentiated or shaken, and the world with its gods, humans, and asuras cannot turn it back. And why? Because with that irreversible thought they have gone beyond the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and entered into the flawlessness that is a perfect state. They are stationed  on their own level and, with perfect control over the clairvoyances, purify a buddhafield, bring beings to perfection, and pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield to behold, salute, and hear the doctrine from the lord buddhas there. They generate wholesome roots from those lord buddhas in those buddhafields, make inquiries of those lord buddhas, and, questioning them, serve them.
“Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing like that comprehend whatever works of Māra come up, do not come under the control of whatever works of Māra come up, and purify those works of Māra at the very limit of reality with skillful means. They are not uncertain and harbor no doubt about their own level. And why? Because they have no uncertainty about the very limit of reality, and they do not conceive of the very limit of reality as one or two. Because of such an understanding, they do not produce a thought at the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level even after returning back to a life. And why? Subhūti, it is because bodhisattva great beings do not see in dharmas that are empty of their own marks any dharma at all that is produced, or stops, or is defilement, or purification. Subhūti, even after returning back to a life, those bodhisattva great beings do not think, ‘I will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening’; rather, they think, ‘There is no doubt about it, I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ And why? Subhūti, it is because unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is empty of its own mark. Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings  thus stand on their own level, and on their own level they do not place their trust in others; on their own level they cannot be crushed. And why? Subhūti, it is because irreversible bodhisattva great beings standing like that are endowed with knowledge that cannot be stolen.
 “Subhūti, if Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a buddha comes into the presence of irreversible bodhisattva great beings and says, ‘You should gain the state of a worthy one right here. Your unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has not been prophesied. You have not even gained that forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas on account of which those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas would prophesy your unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. You do not have the attributes, the tokens, or the signs—those attributes, tokens, and signs, endowed with which your unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening would be prophesied.’ Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings hear those words but still are not cowed, do not tense up, and if their state of mind is not altered, if their minds do not become terrified, then, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings should know, ‘Those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have prophesied my unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ Why? It is because of knowing, ‘I am endowed with those dharmas on account of which a bodhisattva great being’s unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening would be prophesied.’
 “Subhūti, Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a buddha comes into the presence of irreversible bodhisattva great beings and says, ‘Your unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has not been prophesied. You are destined  for the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level.’ Even so, Subhūti, if those bodhisattva great beings still think, ‘Hey! This is Māra or a person possessed by Māra disguised in the form of a buddha who has come. The tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha does not inspire bodhisattva great beings to take up the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level,’ then, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings should know that they have been prophesied. 
“Subhūti, Māra the wicked one disguised in the form of a buddha comes into the presence of irreversible bodhisattva great beings reading aloud and reciting the expanded class of sūtras from memory and says, ‘Those sūtras you are occupying yourself with are not the sūtras taught by the buddhas and śrāvakas, they are taught by Māra.’ Even so, if those bodhisattva great beings know him, thinking, ‘Hey! This is Māra or a person possessed by Māra separating me from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ then, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings should know that those past tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have prophesied their unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and those bodhisattva great beings should know that they are standing on the irreversible level. Why? Subhūti, it is because they have those attributes, tokens, and signs of the bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom  will give up even themselves, give up even their lives to look after the doctrine.
 “Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings make an effort to look after the good doctrine in such a way as to look after the doctrine of past, future, and present lord buddhas. Why? Because they think, ‘If I look after the good doctrine it becomes an act of worship of the past, future, and present lord buddhas. I will be looking after the good doctrine of the past, future, and present buddhas as well.’
“What is the good doctrine for the sake of which they give up even themselves? Here it is the doctrine that the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha teaches, that ‘all dharmas are empty.’ It is the one that certain fools reject and argue against, saying, ‘That is not the Dharma, that is not the Vinaya, that is not the Teacher’s Doctrine.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will give up even themselves for the sake of that doctrine.
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train in that as follows. They should train, thinking, ‘When the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas appear in the future, I will be included among their number. It has been prophesied of me, too, that I will be there. That doctrine for the sake of which I would give up even myself and would give up even my life is my doctrine too.’ Seeing that reality, Subhūti, forces the bodhisattva great beings to give up even themselves for the sake of the good doctrine. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes, those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from awakening.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings  are not unsure and do not harbor doubts about the Dharma teaching of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. They look after everything those lord buddhas have said, and having thus taken it up, those teachings are not lost. And why? Because they have obtained the dhāraṇīs.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, on account of which dhāraṇī bodhisattva great beings have obtained are the sūtras spoken by the tathāgatas not lost?” 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “because they have obtained the dhāraṇī for bearing the sūtras spoken by the tathāgatas in mind, they are not lost.”
 “Lord, is it only the sūtras spoken by the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas that they do not harbor doubts about, and not the ones śrāvakas have spoken, or the gods have spoken, or the nāgas have spoken, or the yakṣas have spoken, or the gandharvas have spoken, or the asuras have spoken, or the garuḍas have spoken, or the kinnaras have spoken, or the mahoragas have spoken?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “whatever the sound, conventional term, and voice, in every case the bodhisattva great beings are not unsure and do not harbor doubts about it. And why? Subhūti, it is because they have obtained a dhāraṇī. Subhūti, you should know that bodhisattva great beings endowed with those attributes,  those tokens, and those signs are irreversible from awakening.”
This was the fiftieth chapter, “Teaching the Signs of Irreversibility,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 51: Skillful Means
The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening are endowed with tremendous good qualities. Lord, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are endowed with infinite good qualities. Lord, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are endowed with immeasurable good qualities.” 
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Irreversible bodhisattva great beings are endowed with tremendous good qualities. Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are endowed with infinite good qualities. Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings are endowed with immeasurable good qualities. And why? It is because they have gained a limitless and boundless knowledge not shared in common with śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas. Standing in that knowledge, irreversible bodhisattva great beings accomplish the detailed and thorough knowledges. Though questioned by the world with its gods, humans, and asuras, their responses with the detailed and thorough knowledges can never be exhausted.” 
Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha has well sorted out those attributes,  those tokens, and those signs on account of which bodhisattva great beings are irreversible from awakening. Engaged as you are in the exposition of those attributes, tokens, and signs of irreversible bodhisattva great beings for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, Lord, would that you might also well expound those deep places standing in which bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections complete the four applications of mindfulness, up to complete the knowledge of all aspects.” 
Venerable Subhūti having made this request, the Lord said to him, “Excellent, Subhūti, excellent. It is excellent, Subhūti, that you have it in mind to ask about those deep, deep places for the sake of the irreversible bodhisattva great beings. 
“Subhūti, deep place is a term for emptiness, the signless, the wishless, the absence of occasioning anything, nonproduction, freedom from greed, cessation, nirvāṇa, peace, suchness, the very limit of reality, and the dharma-constituent. Subhūti, those deep places have come to be words for nirvāṇa.”
“Lord, are they words only for nirvāṇa or are they, Lord, words for all dharmas?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “that—namely ‘deep, deep’—is a term for all dharmas. And why? Subhūti, it is because form is deep. Subhūti, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are deep.  Subhūti, the eyes are also deep. Subhūti, similarly, connect this with each, up to the thinking mind is deep, up to Subhūti, awakening is deep. And why, Subhūti, is form deep? Just as the suchness of form is deep, so too is form deep; just as the suchness of feeling . . . perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness is deep, so too is consciousness deep. Subhūti, similarly, connect this with each, up to Subhūti, just as the suchness of awakening is deep, so too is awakening deep.”
“Lord, what is the suchness of form like, and what is the suchness of . . . up to awakening like?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “there is no form in the suchness of form, and there is no suchness of form other than form. The suchness of form is like that. Subhūti, there is no . . . , up to consciousness in the suchness of consciousness, and there is no suchness of consciousness other than consciousness. The suchness of consciousness is like that. There is no . . . , up to awakening in the suchness of awakening, and there is no suchness of awakening other than awakening. The suchness of awakening is like that.” 
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, it is amazing the extent to which with a simple method irreversible bodhisattva great beings have been made to turn back from form, and nirvāṇa has been pointed out; they have been made to turn back from feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, and nirvāṇa has been pointed out; and they have been made to turn back from all grasping at ordinary and extraordinary, shared in common and not shared in common, with outflows and without outflows, and nirvāṇa has been pointed out.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings  think about these deep, deep places connected with the perfection of wisdom, weigh and ponder them, thinking, ‘I must stand like that in the perfection of wisdom as it has been taught; I must train like that in the perfection of wisdom as it has been taught,’ those bodhisattva great beings, Subhūti, practicing the perfection of wisdom as it has been taught like that, meditating like that, reflecting deeply on it like that, applying themselves like that, trying like that, making an effort like that, with just a single production of the thought appropriate infinite, countless wholesome roots without measure and stop saṃsāra for an immeasurable eon. Since that is the case, what need is there to say more about those who have an unadulterated practice of the perfection of wisdom and remain with their attention connected with awakening?
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, say there is a man with a strong libido and a fertile imagination who has set up a date with an outstanding, beautiful, good-looking woman, but that woman is under somebody else’s protection so she cannot get out of her home. What do you think, Subhūti? With what will that man’s imagination be preoccupied?”
 “Lord,” said Subhūti, “that man’s imagination will be preoccupied with that woman, thinking, ‘Will she not come? When she has come then I am going to lie down together with her. I am going to get her to come back again and have sex with her.’ ”
 “What do you think, Subhūti,” asked the Lord, “how many times would that man imagine her during the passing of a day or a night?”
 “During the passing of a day or a night that man would imagine her a lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti. 
 “Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “for as many times as that man imagines her during the passing of a day and night, for that many eons will saṃsāra be stopped and put an end to by bodhisattva great beings training in and reflecting deeply on this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught, bodhisattvas who endeavor at whatever will stop those faults—those faults on account of which bodhisattva great beings turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Subhūti, even were you to fill up as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River with the wholesome roots appropriated in a single day by a bodhisattva great being thus preoccupied with and dwelling in the dwelling of this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught, it still would not approach what remains of those wholesome roots even by a hundredth part, or by a thousandth part, or by a hundred thousandth part; it would not stand up to any number, or fraction, or counting, or example, or comparison. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if that bodhisattva great being separated from the perfection of wisdom were to give as many gifts as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the Three Jewels—the Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel, and Saṅgha Jewel—what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would that bodhisattva great being create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata, an infinite, incalculable, immeasurable amount,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “the bodhisattva great beings who make an effort at this perfection of wisdom as it has been taught create even more merit than that. And why? Subhūti, it is because just that is the vehicle of the bodhisattva great beings,  and in that vehicle they will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if that bodhisattva great being separated from the perfection of wisdom remained for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River giving gifts to the stream enterers; giving gifts to the once-returners, non-returners, and worthy ones; giving gifts to the pratyekabuddhas; and giving gifts to the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas, what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would that bodhisattva great being create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who makes an effort at this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught creates even more merit than that. And why? Subhūti, it is because, having practiced this perfection, bodhisattva great beings pass beyond the level of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “What do you think, Subhūti, if a bodhisattva great being separated from the perfection of wisdom remaining for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River were to give gifts, guard morality, cultivate patience, make an effort at perseverance, become absorbed in concentration, and cultivate wisdom, Subhūti, based on that would that bodhisattva great being create a lot of merit?” 
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who remains for one single day in this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught, giving gifts, guarding morality, cultivating patience, making an effort at perseverance, becoming absorbed in concentration, and cultivating wisdom, creates even more merit than that. And why? Subhūti, it is because this perfection of wisdom is the mother of the bodhisattva great beings; this perfection of wisdom gives birth to the bodhisattva great beings; and because, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings dwelling in this perfection of wisdom complete all the buddhadharmas. 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, if a bodhisattva great being separated from the perfection of wisdom remaining for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River were to give the gift of Dharma, Subhūti, based on that would that bodhisattva great being create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who remains for one single day in this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught, giving the gift of Dharma, creates even more merit than that. And why? Subhūti, it is because that bodhisattva great being separated from the perfection of wisdom is separated from the knowledge of all aspects, while that bodhisattva great being inseparable from the perfection of wisdom is inseparable from  the knowledge of all aspects. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should not be separated from the perfection of wisdom. 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, if a bodhisattva great being separated from the perfection of wisdom were to have made an effort at the four applications of mindfulness, and were to have made an effort at the emptiness meditative stabilization, signless meditative stabilization, and wishless meditative stabilization for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, Subhūti, based on that would that a son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has made an effort at this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught, at the four applications of mindfulness, up to at the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha for one single day creates even more merit than that. And why? Subhūti, it is because it is impossible, there is no chance that a bodhisattva great being who is inseparable from the perfection of wisdom turns back from the knowledge of all aspects—that is not a possibility. But it is possible, there is a chance, Subhūti, that a bodhisattva great being who is separated from the perfection of wisdom turns back from the knowledge of all aspects—that is a possibility.
 “Subhūti, if a bodhisattva great being separated from the perfection of wisdom were to remain for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River  dedicating the gift of material possessions, the gift of Dharma, and the attention associated with inward absorption to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “if a son of a good family or daughter of a good family remaining for one single day in this deep perfection of wisdom were to dedicate the gift of material possessions, the gift of Dharma, the perfection of wisdom, and those attentions associated with inward absorption to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening it would create even more merit than that. And why? Subhūti, it is because dedication with this—that is, the perfection of wisdom—is the ultimate dedication, while a dedication without the perfection of wisdom is not a dedication. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should become skilled in dedication with the perfection of wisdom.
 “Subhūti, if a certain son of a good family or daughter of a good family separated from the perfection of wisdom were to remain for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River rejoicing in all the wholesome roots, as many as there are, of past, future, and present lord buddhas together with their śrāvaka saṅghas, dedicating them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would that a son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?” 
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “if a son of a good family or daughter of a good family remaining for one single day in this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught were to dedicate those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening it would create even more merit than that. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should become skilled in dedication with the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti inquired of him, “Lord, the Lord has said, ‘Whatever merit has been accumulated, it is all imaginary,’ so how will a son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit? Lord, since what has been accumulated does not exist, they will not be able to enter into the right view and the secure state of a bodhisattva, reach the result of stream enterer, up to or fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “Since whatever has been accumulated does not exist, they will not be able to enter into the right view and the secure state of a bodhisattva, reach the result of stream enterer, up to or fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Subhūti, what the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom have accumulated appears as just empty, appears as just in vain, appears to just ring hollow, appears to be just pointless. And why? Subhūti, it is because bodhisattva great beings have trained well in inner emptiness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to have trained well in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Subhūti, to the extent here that bodhisattva great beings stand in emptiness examining those accumulations of merit, to that extent they are inseparable from the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, to the extent that bodhisattva great beings are inseparable from the perfection of wisdom, to that extent they create incalculable, infinite, immeasurable merit.”
 “What are the specific features of incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable, and what makes them different?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord said, “The incalculable is that which has no enumeration, that which you cannot count as a calculable element or an incalculable element. The infinite is that of which a measure in past, future, and present phenomena cannot be apprehended. The immeasurable is that of which you cannot take a measurement.” 
 “Lord, would there also be a way such that form would also be incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable; a way such that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness would also be incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable?”
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “there would also be a way such that form would also be incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable; a way such that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness would also be incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable.”
 “Lord, in what way would form also be incalculable, infinite,  and immeasurable, and would feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness also be incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “given that form is empty, it is incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable; given that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are empty, they are incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable.”
 “Lord, is it that just that form is empty, but all phenomena are not also empty like that? Is it just that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are empty, but all phenomena are not also empty like that?”
 “Subhūti, what do you think? Did I not explain that all phenomena are empty?” the Lord asked in return.
 Subhūti said, “Lord, the Tathāgata has explained, ‘All phenomena are empty,’ and Lord, that which is empty is also inexhaustible; it is also incalculable, it is also infinite, and it is also immeasurable. In emptiness you cannot get at a number, you also cannot get at a size, and you cannot get at a measure either. Since that is the case, Lord, you cannot get at a meaning or a word that makes these phenomena different.” 
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “You cannot get at a meaning or a word that makes these phenomena different. Subhūti, it is inexpressible. The Tathāgata expresses it as inexhaustible, or incalculable, or infinite, or immeasurable, or empty, or signless, or wishless,  or not occasioning anything, or nonproduction, or free from greed, or a cessation, or nirvāṇa; and those from inexhaustible, up to nirvāṇa are an exposition in harmony with what causes a tathāgata’s teaching.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, it is amazing the extent to which the Tathāgata has expounded the true dharmic nature of dharmas, even though the true nature of dharmas is inexpressible. Lord, the way I understand the meaning of what you, Lord, have said is that all phenomena are simply inexpressible.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “Subhūti, all phenomena are simply inexpressible, and that inexpressibility of all phenomena, Subhūti, is emptiness, and even emptiness cannot be expressed.”
 “Lord, does an inexpressible reality know increase or decrease?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti, an inexpressible reality does not know increase or decrease,” replied the Lord.
 “Lord,” said Subhūti, “if an inexpressible reality does not increase or decrease, the perfection of giving, Lord, will not increase or decrease. And similarly, up to the perfection of wisdom, Lord, will not increase or decrease, the four applications of mindfulness will not increase or decrease, up to the eightfold noble path will not increase or decrease, the gateways to liberation will not increase  or decrease, the eight deliverances will not increase or decrease, the nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, and four detailed and thorough knowledges will not increase or decrease, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha will not increase or decrease. Lord, if the six perfections, up to four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha thus do not increase or decrease, even the knowledge of all aspects will not come with the good fortune of fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening either.” 
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “Subhūti, an inexpressible reality does not increase or decrease. Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, cultivating the perfection of wisdom, making an effort at the perfection of wisdom with skillful means do not think, ‘I am improving because of the perfection of wisdom, up to I am improving because of the perfection of giving,’ but rather, thinking, ‘Whatever this perfection of giving may be, it is just words’—if they practice the perfection of giving dedicating that attention, those productions of the thought, and also those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening they will make a dedication just like unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Similarly, connect this with each, up to if they practice the perfection of wisdom dedicating that attention,  those productions of the thought, and also those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening they will make a dedication just like unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, what is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “As the suchness of all phenomena is, so too is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,” replied the Lord.
 “What is the suchness of all phenomena, the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord said, “The suchness of form, up to the suchness of nirvāṇa is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and it does not increase, nor does it decrease there. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings inseparable from the perfection of wisdom constantly, time and again abiding there, do not see any dharma increase or decrease. Therefore, Subhūti, an inexpressible reality does not increase or decrease, and similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of giving also does not increase or decrease, up to the perfection of wisdom also does not increase or decrease. Similarly, connect this with each, up to the four detailed and thorough knowledges also do not increase or decrease. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of wisdom like that, by way of no increase or decrease.” 
 Subhūti then asked, “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because of the first production of the thought, or do they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening  because of a later production of the thought? Lord, if you say that bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because of the first production of the thought, that first production of the thought will not have been fully put together with the later production of the thought, and the later production of the thought will not have been fully put together with the first production of the thought. In that case, Lord, given that the mind and mental factors—the dharmas—will not have been fully put together, how will wholesome roots be amassed? If wholesome roots have not been amassed, it is not possible to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here certain learned persons understand the meaning of an explanation through an illustration, so, in order that you will understand this—namely, the meaning of this explanation—I will furnish an illustration. What do you think, Subhūti? When a wick is being lit up by the flame of an oil lamp, is that wick burned up by encountering the first tongue of fire or is that wick burned up by encountering a later tongue of fire?”
 “Lord,” replied Subhūti, “that wick is not burned up by encountering the first tongue of fire, and, Lord, that wick is not burned up independent of that first tongue of fire. Lord, that wick is not burned up by encountering a later tongue of fire, and, Lord, that wick is not burned up independent of that later tongue of fire.” 
 “Subhūti, what do you think, does that wick get burned up or not get burned up?” asked the Lord.
 “Lord, it gets burned up. Sugata, it gets burned up,” replied Subhūti.
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “even though bodhisattva great beings do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect,  complete awakening because of the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening independent of the first production of the thought either. And even though bodhisattva great beings do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because of a later production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening independent of a later production of the thought either. But still, it is not that bodhisattva great beings do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Rather, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, starting from the first production of the thought, having completed up to the tenth level, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Lord, bodhisattva great beings, having completed all the ten levels, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings, having completed the Śuklavipaśyanā level, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Bodhisattva great beings, having completed the Gotra level, Aṣṭamaka level, Darśana level, Tanū level, Vītarāga level, and Kṛtāvin level, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Bodhisattva great beings, having completed the Pratyekabuddha level, fully awaken to unsurpassed,  perfect, complete awakening. Bodhisattva great beings, having completed the Bodhisattva level, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and bodhisattva great beings, having completed the Buddha level, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. There, when bodhisattva great beings train on all ten levels, they do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because of the first production of the thought, but they do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening independent of the first production of the thought either. They do not because of a later production of the thought fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and they do not do so independent of a later production of the thought either. But still bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Lord,” said Subhūti, “even though it is not because of the first production of the thought, still bodhisattva great beings do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening independent of the first production of the thought either. So too, Lord, even though it is not because of a later production of the thought, still bodhisattva great beings do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening independent of a later production of the thought either. Lord, this dependent origination where bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is deep.” 
 “Subhūti, what do you think, will that thought which has stopped be produced again?” asked the Lord. 
 “No it will not, Lord,” replied Subhūti.
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is that thought which has been produced subject to stopping?” he asked.
 “It is subject to stopping, Lord; it is subject to stopping, Sugata.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, will that which is subject to stopping stop?”
 “No it will not, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, will it remain just as suchness does?”
 “It will remain just as suchness does, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, if it will remain just as suchness does, will it not be unmoved?”
 “No it will not, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is suchness deep?
 “It is deep, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is that thought suchness?
 “It is not, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is that thought other than suchness?”
 “It is not, Lord.” 
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is thought in suchness?”
 “It is not, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is suchness in thought?”
 “It is not, Lord.” 
 “Subhūti, what do you think, does suchness see suchness?”
 “It does not, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is someone practicing like that practicing the deep perfection of wisdom?”
 “Lord,  someone practicing like that is practicing the deep perfection of wisdom.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is someone practicing like that practicing anything?”
 “Lord, someone practicing like that is not practicing anything at all. And why? Lord, it is because those habitual ideas do not occur in bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom and abiding in suchness. They do not have habitual ideas. And why? Lord, it is because suchness does not have habitual ideas about anything, and nobody has habitual ideas about anything there.” 
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord asked him further, “Subhūti, where do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom practice?”
 “Lord, they practice in the ultimate where there are no habitual dualistic ideas,” he replied.
 “Subhūti, what do you think, do those who practice the ultimate have anything to do with habitual ideas? Do they have anything to do with causal signs?”
 “They do not, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, has the perception of a causal sign disintegrated because of them?”
 “It has not, Lord,” he replied.
 “Well then, Subhūti, how have bodhisattva great beings’ perceptions of a causal sign disintegrated?”
 Having been asked that, venerable Subhūti responded to the Lord, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apply themselves with the thought, ‘I will meditate on a causal sign,’ or ‘I will investigate the absence of a causal sign.’ Lord,  bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening up until the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, up to and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are completed. Lord, that is the bodhisattva great beings’ skillful means. With those skillful means they do not cultivate any dharma and they do not cause any to disintegrate either. Why? Lord, it is because bodhisattva great beings realize all dharmas are empty of their own marks. Now, standing in that emptiness of their own marks, they become absorbed for the sake of beings in the three meditative stabilizations, meditative stabilizations that bring beings to maturity. 
 “How, Lord, when they do so, will bodhisattva great beings become absorbed for the sake of beings in the three meditative stabilizations?” 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here bodhisattva great beings standing in the three meditative stabilizations connect beings who practice with wishes to wishlessness; the bodhisattvas establish beings who practice with thought constructions in emptiness; and they establish beings who practice with causal signs in signlessness. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom thus bring beings to maturity with those three meditative stabilizations.” 
This was the fifty-first chapter, “Skillful Means,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 52: Completion of Means
Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Subhūti,  “Venerable Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings have become absorbed in the three meditative stabilizations on emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness in a dream, do they improve on account of the perfection of wisdom?” 
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked that, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Venerable Śāriputra, if they improve on account of having meditated during the day, they improve in a dream like that as well. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because a dream and the daytime are undifferentiated. Venerable Śāriputra, if bodhisattva great beings who practice meditation on the perfection of wisdom during the daytime have a meditation on the perfection of wisdom, then there is also a meditation on the perfection of wisdom in bodhisattva great beings’ dreams as well.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, venerable Śāriputra then asked him, “Venerable Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings have made some karma in a dream is there an accumulation or diminution in their karma?” 
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “the Lord has said that all phenomena are like a dream, so there is no accumulation or diminution there. And why? Because you cannot apprehend any phenomenon in a dream that is accumulated or diminished.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, if it is thought about in a certain way, on waking there is also an accumulation or reduction in one’s karma,” said Śāriputra.
 Venerable Subhūti asked venerable Śāriputra in return, “Venerable Śāriputra, what would you say about the karma of someone who committed a murder during the day, and someone who dreamed about committing the murder and on waking thought, ‘I killed him. It is excellent that I killed him’?” 
 “Venerable Subhūti,” said Śāriputra, “karma does not happen without an objective support; intention does not happen without an objective support. Karma only happens with an objective support, and intention only happens with an objective support.”
 “Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra, exactly so!” said Subhūti. “Karma does not happen without an objective support; intention does not happen without an objective support. Venerable Śāriputra, karma only happens with an objective support, not without an objective support, and intention only happens with an objective support, not without an objective support. The intellect engages with the seen, the heard, the thought—something one has been aware of; the intellect does not engage with the unseen, the unheard, the unthought—a thing of which one has not been conscious. There, one intellectual act gets hold of defilement. Another intellectual act gets hold of purification. Therefore, Venerable Śāriputra, karma only happens with an objective support, not without an objective support, and intention only happens with an objective support, not without an objective support.”
 “Venerable Subhūti, the Lord has said ‘all karma is isolated and all intention is isolated,’ so how could karma happen with an objective support, and not happen without an objective support, and how could intention happen with an objective support, and not happen without an objective support?” asked Śāriputra.
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” replied Subhūti, “ordinary beings, having made each separate one into a causal sign, pile up karmas, so karma happens only with an objective support, not without an objective support; intention happens only with an objective support, not without an objective support.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, venerable Śāriputra asked him,  “Venerable Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings in a dream give gifts, guard morality, cultivate patience, make an effort at perseverance, become absorbed in concentration, cultivate wisdom, and have also turned over those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, would they have been turned over to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra,” said Subhūti, “you should ask this of Maitreya, the bodhisattva great being interrupted by a single birth, prophesied by the Lord to be irreversible from awakening, who has direct witness of this. He will respond with the answer.” 
Then venerable Śāriputra said to the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, “Son of a good family, the elder Subhūti has said this: ‘You should ask this of Maitreya, the bodhisattva great being interrupted by a single birth, prophesied by the Lord to be irreversible from awakening, who has direct witness of this. He will respond with the answer.’ ”
Venerable Śāriputra having said this, the bodhisattva great being Maitreya said to him, “Venerable monk Śāriputra, what do you think, will this—the designation ‘Maitreya the bodhisattva great being’—respond with the answer; or will form respond with the answer; or will feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness respond with the answer; or even will that emptiness of form respond with the answer, or will that emptiness of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness  respond with the answer? They cannot do so. I see no dharma at all that responds with the answer, no answer that is the response, and no one to be responded to with an answer. I also see no dharma of which unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has been prophesied, none by which it has been prophesied, and none the prophecy is about. All those dharmas are not two and cannot be divided into two, so I do not see those dharmas.”
Then venerable Śāriputra asked the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, “Son of a good family, have you had direct witness of those dharmas in the way you have explained them to be?”
“Venerable monk Śāriputra,” said Maitreya, “I do not directly witness those dharmas in the way I have explained them to be.”
Then it occurred to venerable Śāriputra to think, “Ah! The bodhisattva great being Maitreya has a deep wisdom, exhibited in this exposition of how he has practiced the practice of the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom—practicing these without apprehending anything.”
Then the Lord asked venerable Śāriputra, “Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, do you see that dharma on account of which you come to be known as a worthy one?” 
“Lord, I do not,” replied Śāriputra.
“Similarly, Śāriputra,” said the Lord, “it also does not occur to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘This dharma has been prophesied to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, this is the dharma that is being prophesied, and this is the dharma that will be prophesied.’ Bodhisattva great beings  practicing like that are practicing the perfection of wisdom. 
“They are not anxious, thinking, ‘May it not be that I do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ They do fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that are practicing the perfection of wisdom. Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified, thinking, ‘May it not be that I do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ They do fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings complete the perfection of wisdom and get close to the knowledge of all aspects?”
Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving see hungry beings, or see thirsty beings, or the badly clothed, or those with threadbare shawls, or thin mats, or without any mats at all, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the perfection of giving such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, those beings will not face those disadvantages, they will not occur in any way at all, and so that in that buddhafield those beings will have the possessions and enjoyments of the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, of the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods, the possessions and enjoyments just as they have them.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva  great beings practicing the perfection of giving like that complete the perfection of giving. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality see beings who are killing, or see . . . up to beings with wrong views, or see those with a short lifespan, who are ugly, have little autonomy, a lot of trouble, few enjoyments, little charisma, in a disadvantaged family, or with missing limbs, they reflect deeply, thinking, ‘One way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, may those beings not have those faults, may they not occur in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the perfection of morality. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of patience see beings bearing malice toward each other, striking with sticks, stones, and weapons, threatening each other’s lives, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice for awakening so that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, those beings will not have those faults, they will not occur in any way at all, and so that they think all beings are like parents, think all beings are like brothers and sisters, and have loving and beneficial thoughts.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the perfection of patience  and get close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of perseverance see beings lacking in perseverance, lazy, not taking pleasure in the three vehicles, turning their backs on the three vehicles, far from entering into the Śrāvaka Vehicle, or Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, or Buddha Vehicle, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the perfection of perseverance so that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, those beings will not have those faults, they will not occur in any way at all, and so that all beings will make a vigorous, stable attempt to pass into complete nirvāṇa in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, or Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, or Great Vehicle, whichever is suitable.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the perfection of perseverance and get close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of concentration see beings obscured by the five obscurations—desire for sense gratification, malice, drowsiness and dozing, gross mental excitement and uneasiness, and doubt—or see those under the influence of the five obscurations, or see those separated from the first concentration, up to separated from the fourth concentration, or see those separated from love, compassion, joy, and equanimity, or from the absorption in the station of endless space, absorption in the station of endless consciousness, absorption in  the station of nothing-at-all, and absorption in the station of neither perception nor nonperception, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the perfection of concentration, I must purify a buddhafield, I must bring beings to maturity so that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, those beings will not have those faults, they will not occur in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the perfection of concentration and get close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom see beings who are intellectually confused or separated from ordinary and extraordinary right view, saying action has no effect, saying things exist and saying things do not exist, saying things are annihilated and saying things are eternal, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice in such a way that I practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity so that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, those beings will not have those faults, they will not occur in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the perfection of wisdom and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see the three masses of beings—those destined for the perfect state, those destined to be wrong, and those not necessarily destined—they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, there will not even be words for those destined to be wrong, and those not necessarily destined; they will not occur in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings in the hells, and see beings in the animal world, and the world of Yama, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, there will not even be words for the three terrible forms of life, they will not occur in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see stumps, thorns, crevices, crevices in cliffs, precipices,  runoff from gutters, and pools of excrement on the face of the earth, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, there will not be those faults, they will not occur in any way at all, and it will be smooth like the palm of a baby’s hand.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see the face of the earth made of a clay without gold and silver, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, the face of the earth will be completely covered with golden sand.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings who have become acquisitive, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield,  and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, there will be no beings who become acquisitive, they will not occur in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see the four castes (royal caste, brahmin caste, business caste, and low caste), they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, there will not even be words for the four castes, they will not be made known in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see privileged, middling, and deprived beings, or see beings from low families, bad families, and good families, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening beings, will not have such faults, they will not occur in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore,  Subhūti, when bodhisattva great being practicing the six perfections see beings who are different colors, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, beings will not be different colors; rather, beings will all stand out, be beautiful and good looking, and endowed with an excellent, clear, splendid color.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see a ruler, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, no one will be designated ruler other than the Dharma king, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha; it will not occur in any other way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings in different forms of life, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield,  and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, there will be no different forms of life—as beings in hell, in the animal world, the world of Yama, or as gods or humans—they will not occur in any way at all. Rather, all beings will have the same work and will be inseparable from the four applications of mindfulness, up to the four detailed and thorough knowledges.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see the four birthplaces of beings—birth from an egg, birth from a womb, birth from warmth and moisture, and miraculous birth—they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will take none other than miraculous birth, and there will be no birth from an egg, birth from a womb, or from warmth and moisture; those will not occur in any way at all.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings lacking the five clairvoyances, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice  the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will have the five clairvoyances.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see the feces and urine of beings, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will come to live on joy.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings who do not radiate light, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will radiate self-originated light.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to  the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see the months of all beings, as well as the half-months, seasons, and the cycle of years, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, there will not even be words for the months, half-months, seasons, or cycle of years of all beings.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings who live short lives, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will have infinite life.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings who do not have the major marks, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield,  when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will have the thirty-two major marks of a great person.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings who have not planted wholesome roots, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will have planted wholesome roots, and on account of having planted those wholesome roots will remain in the presence of the lord buddhas.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings afflicted by disease, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will not have the four diseases that come from wind disorder, bile disorder, phlegm disorder, or disorder of the three in combination.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings  practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings who have become afflicted by the three afflictions, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, all beings will not be afflicted by the three afflictions—greed, hatred, and confusion—and all beings will be free from greed, free from hate, and free from confusion.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
Similarly, connect this with the rest at full length, just as it has been connected in the first section.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections see beings with deficient belief, they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, even the words for the two vehicles—Śrāvaka Vehicle and Pratyekabuddha Vehicle—will not be made known, and all beings will come to have set out directly for the knowledge of all aspects.’ 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings  practicing the six perfections see beings with pride in being superior they reflect deeply, ‘I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, even the words for pride in being superior will not be made known; rather, all beings will have no pride in being superior.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections produce the thought, ‘If, in my buddhafield, life is finite, light is finite, and the community of monks is finite, I will not, for the time being, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Rather, I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that one way or the other in my buddhafield, when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, there will be infinite life, infinite light, and an infinite community of monks.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections reflect deeply, ‘If at that time my buddhafield is a single one I will not, for the time being,  fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Rather, I must practice the six perfections, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity such that when I have gained awakening, one way or the other there will be as many buddhafields as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great being practicing the six perfections should reflect deeply, ‘Oh! Saṃsāra is long. Oh! The world of beings is limitless.’ And they should properly pay attention to this: ‘Oh! This saṃsāra is boundless like space. Oh! This world of beings is also boundless like space. Here there is nobody in saṃsāra, and there is nobody liberated either.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that complete the six perfections and get close to the knowledge of all aspects.”
This was the fifty-second chapter, “Completion of Means,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 53: The Prophecy about Gaṅgadevī
Then the sister Gaṅgadevī, who had joined the assembly and was seated in that very retinue, got up from her seat, adjusted her upper robe so it hung down from one shoulder, knelt down with her right knee on the ground, cupped her palms together in a gesture of supplication specifically to the Lord, bowed forward to him, and said to the Lord, “I too, Lord, I too, Sugata, will practice the six perfections well, and just like the tathāgatas,  worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas will look after such buddhafields as those taught in this perfection of wisdom.”
Then that woman took golden flowers; took silver flowers, flowers that grow on dry land, and flowers that grow in the water; took all the adornments; and took twinned muslin scarfs with a gold-like color and strewed them specifically over the Lord. Through the power of the Lord, the moment after she had strewed all those twinned muslin scarfs and so on, they stayed there, a second story in the space right above the Lord’s head, square with four corners and four pillars, equidimensional, extremely excellent, perfectly proportioned and delightful. That woman then made that second story into something shared in common with all beings and dedicated it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
Then at that time the Lord, knowing the intention of that woman, smiled. And it is in the very nature of a lord buddha that when they smile, from the opening of the lord’s mouth issue forth light rays of many colors, of a variety of colors—namely, blue, yellow, red, white, reddish brown, crystalline, and silvery. Having dispersed through limitless and boundless world systems and retracted back they circle around the lord three times and disappear into the lord from the top of his head.
 Venerable Ānanda then got up from his seat, adjusted his upper robe so it hung down from one shoulder, knelt down with his right knee on the ground, cupped his palms together in a gesture of supplication specifically to the Lord, bowed forward to him, and said to the Lord, “Lord, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete  buddhas do not give a smile without a cause, without a condition. So why did you smile? What is the cause, what is the condition?”
 Venerable Ānanda having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Ānanda, in the future during the eon called Tārakopama this sister Gaṅgadevī will become the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha called Suvarṇapuṣpa, the one with the golden flowers, and appear in the world. This, Ānanda, is this woman’s last female body. Ānanda, this sister Gaṅgadevī, having forsaken a woman’s body and acquired a man’s body, will be born in the buddhafield of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya, the world system called Abhirati. She will live a celibate life there. Ānanda, that bodhisattva great being’s name will also be Suvarṇapuṣpa. Ānanda, that bodhisattva great being Suvarṇapuṣpa, having died there, will pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield and will never be separated from the lord buddhas. Just as, Ānanda, a wheel-turning emperor goes walking from palace to palace for as long as he lives but until the time of his death the soles of his feet never press upon the ground, similarly, Ānanda, the bodhisattva great being called Suvarṇapuṣpa will pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield until fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, never separated from the lord buddhas.”
 Then it occurred to venerable Ānanda to think,  “One should be aware that howsoever many bodhisattva great beings there are assembled in that buddhafield, they will be a tathāgata assembly.”
 Then the Lord, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to venerable Ānanda, said to venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, it is exactly as you are thinking! It is exactly so! One should be aware that those bodhisattva great beings will be a tathāgata assembly. Ānanda, in the buddhafield of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Suvarṇapuṣpa his community of monks will be infinite. The measure of his community of monks cannot be taken by saying that there are this many śrāvakas, or there are up to a hundred śrāvakas, or there are up to a thousand śrāvakas, or there are up to a hundred thousand śrāvakas, or there are up to one hundred million śrāvakas, or there are up to a hundred one hundred million śrāvakas, or there are up to a thousand one hundred million śrāvakas, or there are up to a hundred thousand one hundred million śrāvakas, or there are up to a hundred thousand billion one hundred million śrāvakas; rather, there will be an ananta of an asaṃkhyeya of a hundred thousand billion one hundred million śrāvakas. Ānanda, in that buddhafield where the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Suvarṇapuṣpa will have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, those faults described in this perfection of wisdom will not exist and will not appear as anything at all, in any way at all.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Ānanda asked him, “Lord, in relation to whom did this sister plant such a wholesome root?” 
 “Ānanda,” replied the Lord, “this sister planted such a wholesome root in relation to the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Dīpaṃkara, and having dedicated that wholesome root to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, because she wanted unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening she strewed golden flowers on the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Dīpaṃkara as well. Ānanda, when I strewed blue lotus flowers on the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Dīpaṃkara because I wanted unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, the lord, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Dīpaṃkara, knowing I had the wholesome root, prophesied my full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. At that time this sister heard the prophecy about me and produced the thought, ‘Yes! Just as a full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has been prophesied of this brahmin student, similarly in the future may there also be a prophecy that I too will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ Thus, Ānanda, did this sister first produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in the presence of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Dīpaṃkara.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Ānanda said to him, “Lord, this sister has laid the groundwork for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 Venerable Ānanda having said this, the Lord replied to him, “Exactly so! Ānanda, it is exactly as you say! This sister has laid the groundwork  for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
This was the fifty-third chapter, “The Prophecy about Gaṅgadevī,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 54: Teaching the Cultivation of Skillful Means
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom fully master emptiness and how do they become absorbed in the emptiness meditative stabilization? How do they fully master signlessness and how do they become absorbed in the signlessness meditative stabilization? How do they fully master wishlessness and how do they become absorbed in the wishlessness meditative stabilization? How do they master . . . up to the eightfold noble path? How do they cultivate the eightfold noble path? How do they master the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening? How do they cultivate the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening?” 
Venerable Subhūti having said this, the Lord replied to him, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should understand analytically ‘form is empty,’ and should understand analytically ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are empty.’ Similarly, connect this with each, up to they should understand analytically ‘the desire realm is empty.’ They should understand analytically ‘the form realm and the formless realm are empty.’ And, one way or the other, when they understand this analytically, such an analytical understanding should be without mental distraction. Without mental distraction they do not see the phenomenon that is the phenomenon to be actualized, and not seeing that phenomenon they do not  actualize it. And why? Because they are well trained in phenomena that are empty of their own marks, so they see that all those phenomena—an actualizer, something to be actualized, and something through which there is actualization—are not joined and are not disjoined.” 
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, in regard to what the Lord has said, ‘Bodhisattva great beings should not actualize emptiness,’ how do bodhisattva great beings stand in emptiness but not actualize emptiness?”
 The Lord responded, “When bodhisattva great beings contemplate emptiness furnished with the best of all aspects, they do not contemplate that they should actualize it; rather, they contemplate that they should master it. They contemplate that it is not the time it should be actualized, but rather it is the time it should be mastered. When not in actual meditative equipoise, bodhisattva great beings attach their minds to an objective support and without letting the dharmas on the side of awakening lessen, in the meantime do not actualize the extinction of outflows. And why? Because the bodhisattva great beings are endowed with such prodigious knowledge that they remain with the dharmas on the side of awakening, understanding that it is thus the time for mastery, and it is not the time for actualization. 
 “Subhūti, there bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom thus understand analytically that it is the time for the perfection of giving; that it is the time for the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance,  concentration, and wisdom; that it is the time to cultivate the applications of mindfulness, up to that it is the time to cultivate the eightfold noble path; that it is the time to cultivate the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations; that it is the time to acquire the ten tathāgata powers; that it is the time to acquire the four fearlessnesses and the four detailed and thorough knowledges; that it is the time to acquire great love and great compassion; and that it is not the time to actualize the result of stream enterer, up to that it is not the time to actualize the state of a worthy one; that it is not the time to actualize a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; and that it is not the time to acquire and to master all-knowledge.
 “Thus, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom master emptiness, and persisting with emptiness master signlessness and wishlessness. Persisting with signlessness and wishlessness, they cultivate the eightfold noble path but still do not actualize the result of stream enterer, up to the state of a worthy one. Similarly, connect this with they cultivate the applications of mindfulness and persist in the applications of mindfulness but still do not actualize it. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus master the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, cultivate the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and persist in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, but still do not actualize it. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, a brave, heroic, firmly grounded, physically beautiful, handsome, good-looking  person endowed with the finest, clearest, most deeply imbued beautiful skin color, an expert archer holding hardened weapons who is thoroughly established in the sixty-four vocational arts, knowing as much as can be known about all crafts and vocations, giving pleasure to and loved by many persons, gains great wealth from whatever work they undertake and with that wealth respects, reveres, honors, and worships many people. Having made them feel immense rapture, delight, joy, and happiness, for some purpose or other they lead the mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, into a hair-raising jungle terrifying to simple folk. That person, after having led them there, inspires the mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, to be fearless, saying, ‘Do not be scared, do not be scared, I will quickly free you from this terrifying, scary place.’ When enemies, murderers, and opponents of that person come close in that jungle, because that person has the ultimate power of wisdom, they get those mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, out of that jungle, leading them to freedom. Having reached a settlement, or market town, or city, or other spot uninjured and unharmed, they occasion a feeling of joy and mental happiness in them, but they do not poison their minds against those beings who are enemies and opponents. What is the reason for this? It is because they have expertise in all the vocational arts, so they magically produce immensely more and braver opponents with even more hardened weapons than the enemies and opponents in that jungle, getting rid of those beings who are enemies and opponents by scaring them. Then, having easily freed their parents, sons, and daughters,  that person lives at ease. 
 “Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings radiate out loving thoughts with all beings as the objective support—compassionate, joyful, and balanced thoughts with all beings as the objective support—and while doing so bodhisattva great beings in the interim do not employ a causal sign as a conventional label. They do not actualize that signlessness meditative stabilization on account of which, were they to have actualized it, they would stand on the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a winged bird glides through the air without falling to the ground, but even though it glides through the air in the sky it does not stand and take up a position there. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings also master emptiness and practice emptiness, also master signlessness and wishlessness and make a practice of signlessness and the wishlessness, but they do not actualize those emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations on account of which, were they to have actualized them, they would fall to the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level before completing any of the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, or any of those infinite buddhadharmas, having practiced which they would reach the knowledge of all aspects. 
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, a person, a powerful master archer well trained in archery, shoots an arrow far into the sky. Having shot the arrow far into the sky they again shoot with a series of other, later arrows going after the earlier, not letting them fall to earth. Those arrows do not fall to earth for as long as that person does not want them to. Then, thinking, ‘Let those arrows fall to earth,’  they do not shoot a later arrow up into the sky and that leading series of arrows falls to earth. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom assisted by skillful means do not actualize the final limit of reality for as long as the wholesome roots of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening have not matured, but when the wholesome roots of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening have matured, they then actualize the final limit of reality.
“Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should ponder the true dharmic nature of those dharmas like that.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Those who do what is difficult, Lord, are the bodhisattva great beings who train in this true nature of dharmas, train in the very limit of reality, train in suchness, train in the dharma-constituent, train in the emptiness of what transcends limits, up to train in the emptiness of its own mark, up to train in the three gateways to liberation but do not, in the interim, fall away from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Lord, it is amazing! Sugata, it is amazing!”
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “it is because the bodhisattva great beings do not forsake all beings and, Subhūti, because they find and produce within themselves the thought of a bodhisattva great being, Subhūti, who has not forsaken all beings—this type of special prayer: ‘I will not forsake these ignorant beings, these beings who are deceived because they perceive nonexistent phenomena as existing. I  should not forsake all those ignorant beings. I have not forsaken all beings, so I should also free all these beings caught up in nonexistent phenomena.’ When those bodhisattva great beings find and produce within themselves the emptiness meditative stabilization gateway to liberation, find and produce within themselves the signlessness meditative stabilization gateway to liberation, and find and produce within themselves the wishlessness meditative stabilization gateway to liberation, but in the interim, before reaching the knowledge of all aspects, do not actualize the very limit of reality, you should know that at that time they are endowed with skillful means. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to understand analytically those deep, deep places—namely, inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and the four applications of mindfulness and three gateways to liberation—find and produce within themselves the thought, ‘These beings have been involved for a long time in a false apprehension of facts because of perceiving a self, perceiving a being, up to perceiving someone who knows and someone who sees, so in order to eliminate their view falsely apprehending facts I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and teach the Dharma.’ Then when the bodhisattva great beings become absorbed in the emptiness meditative stabilization, they still do not actualize that very limit of reality on account of which, were they to have actualized it, they would have reached the result of stream enterer, up to would have reached a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. Subhūti, when the bodhisattva great beings become absorbed in the signlessness meditative stabilization and wishlessness meditative stabilization gateways to liberation, the bodhisattva great beings meditate and become absorbed  but still do not actualize the very limit of reality on account of which, were they to have actualized it, they would have reached the result of stream enterer, up to would have reached the state of a worthy one and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that are endowed with those wholesome roots and do not actualize the very limit of reality, but still on account of the production of that thought they do not fall away from the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, or four applications of mindfulness; up to the eightfold noble path; the emptiness, signlessness and wishlessness meditative stabilizations; the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, or four detailed and thorough knowledges; great love; or great compassion. At that time bodhisattva great beings are endowed with the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening and do not fall away from them. Assisted by skillful means they grow in the wholesome dharmas and their faculties are also not like those of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas but are keener. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings think, ‘The minds of these beings have been distorted for a long time by the fourfold erroneous perception of permanence, perception of happiness, perception of the pleasant, and perception of a self, so I will practice for awakening for their sake, and having thus fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening will teach them so that one way or the other they do not practice with the idea of “permanent,” or the idea of “happiness,” or the idea of “pleasant,” or the idea of “self,” but rather with the idea of “impermanent,” the idea of “unpleasant,” the idea of “suffering,”  and the idea of “selfless.” ’ Bodhisattva great beings who have produced that thought and practice the perfection of wisdom with skillful means do not enter into absorption in a buddha’s meditative stabilization until they have completed the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, and great compassion. During that time, they meditate on and become absorbed in the wishlessness meditative stabilization but do not actualize the very limit of reality until they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings think, ‘For a long time these beings have been involved in a false apprehension of facts with the idea of “a self,” or the idea of “a being,” up to or the idea of “one who knows” and “one who sees,” and the idea of “form,” or the idea of “feeling,” or the idea of “perception,” or the idea of “volitional factors,” or the idea of “consciousness,” or the idea of “aggregates,” or the idea of “constituents,” or the idea of “sense fields,” or the idea of “four concentrations,” or the idea of “four immeasurables,” or the idea of “four formless absorptions.” When I fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, one way or the other I will make it so that they will not have these faults of beings who falsely apprehend facts.’ Bodhisattva great beings with the production of those thoughts who practice the perfection of wisdom with skillful means do not actualize the very limit of reality until they have completed the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, and great compassion, and at that time they  complete the cultivation of the emptiness meditative stabilization gateway to liberation. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom think, ‘For a long time these beings have been practicing a practice with causal signs: the causal sign for woman, the causal sign for man, the causal sign for form, the causal sign for formless. When I fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, one way or the other I will make it so that beings will not have such faults as these.’ When bodhisattva great beings who produce those thoughts and also with skillful means practice the perfection of wisdom, they do not, in the interim, actualize the very limit of reality until they have completed the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, and great compassion. Endowed with that production of the thought they complete the cultivation of the signlessness meditative stabilization gateway to liberation. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom think, ‘For a long time these beings have been practicing a practice while making wishes—that is, they have harbored a strong liking for Śatakratu, Brahmā, a world protector, or a wheel-turning emperor; they have harbored a strong liking for form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to they have harbored a strong liking for the knowledge of all aspects—so for their sake, fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, one way or the other I will teach the doctrine so that beings will not have these  wish-making faults.’ 
 “Thus, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who produce those thoughts and also with skillful means practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the cultivation of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization gateways to liberation, and do not, in the interim, actualize the very limit of reality for as long as the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, and great compassion are still not completed, and until they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Subhūti, it is impossible and there is no chance that bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections; practicing inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; practicing the applications of mindfulness; practicing the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations; practicing the ten tathāgata powers, up to and practicing the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—it is impossible that those bodhisattva great beings practicing and mastering them with such knowledge could fall into the absence of volitional activity or inhabit the three realms. 
 “Subhūti, you should ask bodhisattva great beings thus practicing mastery of those thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, ‘How do bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening cultivate the perfection of wisdom when they master those dharmas  with a realization that does not cause them to actualize emptiness; does not cause them to realize the very limit of reality; and does not cause them to actualize the signlessness, wishlessness, not occasioning anything, nonproduction, or the absence of an existing thing which would otherwise lead to the attainment of the result of stream enterer, up to or the state of a worthy one or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening?’ If, Subhūti, when a bodhisattva great being has asked bodhisattva great beings about that, they respond, ‘Those bodhisattva great beings must pay attention to emptiness, must pay attention to signlessness, must pay attention to wishlessness, and must pay attention to not occasioning anything, to nonproduction, and to the absence of an existing thing,’ then, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great being should know that the lord buddhas have prophesied the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of those bodhisattva great beings. And why? Subhūti, it is because they pronounce on, point out, and sort out the mastery of bodhisattva great beings irreversible from awakening. But if, Subhūti, when asked they respond, ‘They should not pay attention to emptiness, and they should not pay attention to signlessness, wishlessness, not occasioning anything, nonproduction, or the absence of an existing thing,’ then, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great being should know that the lord buddhas have not prophesied the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of those bodhisattva great beings. And why?  Subhūti, it is because they do not pronounce on, point out, or sort out the mastery of irreversible bodhisattva great beings, and do not pronounce on, do not point out, and do not sort out the Dharma of irreversible bodhisattva great beings. In regard to them, that bodhisattva great being should know that those bodhisattva great beings are not like irreversible bodhisattva great beings who, having achieved mastery, have stepped onto the irreversible level, passing beyond the Tanū level.”
 “Would there then, Lord, be ways in which the bodhisattva great beings would be irreversible from awakening?” asked Subhūti.
 “There would be, Subhūti,” said the Lord. “It would be if the bodhisattva great beings, whether or not they have heard of the six perfections, give an answer just like an irreversible bodhisattva great being.” 
 “Therefore, Lord,” said Subhūti, “those bodhisattva great beings who practice for awakening are many, but levels that have been cleansed or levels that have not been cleansed do not appear—those bodhisattva great beings who give an answer just like an irreversible bodhisattva great being are few.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings of whom the irreversible knowledge level has been prophesied are few. Those who are prophesied are those who will give such an answer, and you should know that those who will give such an answer are those with cleansed wholesome roots.  The world with its gods, humans, and asuras cannot steal those bodhisattva great beings away.”
This was the fifty-fourth chapter, “Teaching the Cultivation of Skillful Means,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 55: Teaching the Stopping of Thought Construction
“Furthermore, Subhūti, if the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level or the three realms do not retain any attraction for bodhisattva great beings even in dreams, and if they do not entertain the thought that they are of benefit, if they see all dharmas like a dream, see all dharmas like an echo, like a mirage, and like a magical creation and still do not actualize the very limit of reality, you should know, Subhūti, that too is a sign that irreversible bodhisattva great beings are irreversible from awakening. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if in a dream bodhisattva great beings see a tathāgata—a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha teaching the Dharma at the head of, and surrounded by, a retinue of many hundreds, a retinue of many thousands, a retinue of many hundreds of thousands, a retinue of many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion monks and nuns, laymen and laywomen, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas—and if, having listened to that Dharma, thinking, ‘I must understand the meaning of that Dharma,’ they live having set out in the Dharma in full conformity with the Dharma, having set out in total conformity, putting into practice the Dharma in its totality, you should know, Subhūti, that too is a sign that irreversible bodhisattva great beings are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if in a dream  bodhisattva great beings see a tathāgata with the thirty-two major marks of a great person, with a halo extending the length of his outstretched arms, rise up and teach the Dharma to the community of monks while suspended in the sky, and see that tathāgata demonstrate the miracle of miraculous power, magically create magical creations, and with those magical creations do the buddha’s work in other world systems, you should know, Subhūti, that too is a sign that irreversible bodhisattva great beings are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if in a dream bodhisattva great beings see a settlement wiped out or a village wiped out, or burned by fire; or see poisonous wild animals; or see other types of enraged wild animals; or see those on the verge of decapitation; or see other hazards and terrors; or see suffering, mental anguish, and grief; or see the dread of thirst; or see the dread of hunger; or see the death of a mother; or see the death of a father; or see the death of a brother; or see the death of a sister; or see the death of a friend, a counselor, a kinsman, or a blood relative, and they have no pain, fear, trembling, or terror—if they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified and if, on waking after dreaming that dream, they think, ‘Hey! All these three realms are like a dream, so having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, I will teach the doctrine that all the phenomena in the three realms are like a dream’—then you should know, Subhūti, that too is a sign that irreversible bodhisattva great beings are irreversible. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti,  how do you know that when irreversible bodhisattva great beings have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening these three terrible forms of life will not occur as anything at all, in any way at all, in their buddhafields? Subhūti, you do if in a dream the bodhisattva great beings see beings in hell, or see beings in the animal world or in the world of Yama, and become possessed of mindfulness, such a mindfulness in possession of which they think, ‘I will do whatever it takes so that in my buddhafield when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening these three terrible forms of life will not occur as anything at all, in any way at all.’ And why? Because both dharmas—the dream and the end of the dream—are not two and cannot be divided into two. You should know, Subhūti, that too is a sign that irreversible bodhisattva great beings are irreversible.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if irreversible bodhisattva great beings, in a dream or awake, on seeing a village in flames think, ‘These attributes, tokens, and signs, which I have while dreaming or awake, if I have the attributes, tokens, and signs that are those that you see in irreversible bodhisattva great beings, then, through this truth and this truth statement let the flames engulfing this village die down, cool down, and go out,’ and if, when those irreversible bodhisattva great beings  have unleashed the controlling power of truth like that, the flames engulfing this village do die down, cool down, and go out, you should know, Subhūti, it has been prophesied that those irreversible bodhisattva great beings are irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Subhūti, if those masses of flames do not obey the truth statement but burn down house after house, burn down street after street, burn down some houses but not burn down other houses, burn down some streets but not burn down other streets, then, Subhūti, irreversible bodhisattva great beings should know, when thinking about the fact that the houses of some beings burn down and the houses of other beings do not burn down, ‘It is because of those beings’ karma of rejecting the Dharma. In this very life that karma has come to maturity—just that remainder from the karma of rejecting the Dharma has come to maturity.’ Subhūti, you should know that this is a cause of, and this is a condition for irreversible bodhisattva great beings; because of those causes and because of those conditions they are irreversible bodhisattva great beings.
 “I am going to teach something else about those attributes, those tokens, and those signs that are the attributes, tokens, and signs on account of which bodhisattva great beings are known to be irreversible.
 “Subhūti, if some man or woman gets possessed by a demon, irreversible bodhisattva great beings focus as they habitually do and think like this: ‘My unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has been prophesied by earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas; my aspiration regarding how I want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and how I  will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is pure; the attention I pay to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is pure; without śrāvaka thoughts and separated from pratyekabuddha thoughts I am going to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; I am not not going to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and I am absolutely going to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. For the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in countless infinite world systems, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, there is nothing that they do not see, or do not hear, or do not know—nothing at all of which they are not aware, or that they do not directly witness, or to which they have not fully awakened. If those lord buddhas are therefore cognizant of my surpassing aspiration and I indeed will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, then through this truth and this truth statement, whatever demon has taken hold of or violated this man or woman, let that demon be exorcised.’ Subhūti, if when those bodhisattva great beings have said that, the demon has not been exorcised, then you should know, Subhūti, that those bodhisattva great beings’ unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has not been prophesied by the earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.  But if, Subhūti, when those bodhisattva great beings have said that, the demon has been exorcised, then you should know, Subhūti, that those bodhisattva great beings’ unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has been prophesied by earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. From those attributes, those tokens, and those signs you should know, Subhūti, that those bodhisattva great beings are irreversible.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, on account of the controlling power of truth, bodhisattva great beings not practicing the six perfections, without skillful means, not practicing the four applications of mindfulness, up to emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness, who have not entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva, make Māra approach. Subhūti, when those bodhisattva great beings invoke the controlling power of truth with the thought, ‘If I will indeed fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, then through this truth and this truth statement that my unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has been prophesied, may this demon be exorcised,’ then Māra the wicked one eagerly gets to work, thinking, ‘How will I exorcise this demon?’ And why? Because Māra the wicked one is extremely powerful and very grand and the demon is not like that. Therefore, when that demon is exorcised through the controlling power of that Māra the wicked one, it occurs to those bodhisattva great beings to think, ‘It has been exorcised because of my power.’ Not knowing the demon has been exorcised because of the power of Māra, the bodhisattva great beings falsely project superiority over others, and deride, sarcastically compliment, make fun of, and disparage others, thinking, ‘The earlier  tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfect complete buddhas have prophesied my unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, but they have not prophesied the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of these others.’ Just because of that they get more conceited, puff themselves up with pride, distance themselves from the knowledge of all aspects, and distance themselves from the unsurpassed knowledge of a buddha. You should know that when that sort of bodhisattva great being without skillful means gets more conceited, just because of that, for such a one there are two levels. What are the two? They are these, namely, the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level. On account of the controlling power of truth, bodhisattva great beings will thus encounter the work of Māra. There they will not resort to, not worship, not follow after, not become closely acquainted with, and not attend on spiritual friends and will tighten just that bond with Māra. And why? Because they do not practice the six perfections and are not assisted by skillful means. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should know that this too is the work of Māra. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, how does Māra approach bodhisattva great beings not practicing the six perfections, and similarly, connect this with each, up to who have not entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva because of the controlling power of a name?
“Māra the wicked one disguised in some form or other approaches the bodhisattva great beings and says, ‘Son of a good family, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha has prophesied your unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. This will be your name, this will be your mother’s name, this will be your father’s name,  this will be your brother’s name, this will be your sister’s name, and these will be the names of your friends, counselors, kinsmen, and blood relatives.’ He informs them, ‘These are the names of the grandparents on your mother’s and father’s side going back seven generations,’ and tells them, ‘You are from such-and-such a city, such-and-such a town, such-and-such a settlement, and such-and-such a location; you were born in such-and-such a city, in such-and-such a town, and in such-and-such a settlement.’ If they are naturally easygoing he will tell them, ‘You have been naturally easygoing like this before as well.’ If they are keen he will tell them, ‘You have been keen before like that as well.’ If they are jungle dwellers, or if they are alms-food eaters, or if they are refuse-rags wearers, or if they are later-food refusers, or if they are single-sitters, or if they are satisfied with whatever alms they get, or if they are cemetery dwellers, or if they are open-air dwellers, or if they are a tree-root dwellers, or if they are those who sleep sitting up, or if they are natural-bed users, or if they are three-robe wearers, or if they are not needy, or if they are contented, or if they are quite apart, or if they have stopped having their feet massaged, or if they are those who hardly speak, he will also tell them, ‘Also before, like this, . . . you have been those who hardly speak.’ Also, if they are those who hardly say anything he will also tell them, ‘You have been uncommunicative like this before as well.’ And why? He says, ‘It is because you have these sorts of qualities of the ascetic and on account of that it is impossible that you did not have these qualities of the ascetic and excellent restraints before as well. Of that there is no doubt.’ 
“That earlier declaration of their name like that, and that declaration of their family line, and of the qualities of the ascetic they presently have makes them feel a false sense of pride, so again Māra the wicked one approaches them and says, ‘Son of a good family, that you have such qualities of the ascetic is in line with your unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening that has been prophesied by the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.’ Or else he approaches disguised as a monk; or else he approaches disguised as a nun; or else he approaches disguised as a landlord; or else he approaches disguised as their mother; or else he approaches disguised as their father, and having approached he says, ‘Your unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has been prophesied by the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha. And why? Because whatever the good qualities of the irreversible bodhisattva great beings there are, you have them.’
“Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings do not have the attributes, tokens, or signs of an irreversible bodhisattva great being that I have taught, so bodhisattva great beings other than them should know, Subhūti, that those bodhisattva great beings are possessed by Māra the wicked one. And why? Because they do not have those attributes, those tokens, or those signs that irreversible bodhisattva great beings have, and because of that declaration of their name, they falsely project their superiority over bodhisattva great beings other than them, and deride, sarcastically compliment, make fun of, and disparage them. 
“Bodhisattva great beings  should know, Subhūti, that this declaration of a name, through the controlling power of a name, is also the work of Māra the wicked one. And why? Subhūti, it is because bodhisattva great beings not practicing the six perfections do not know Skandhamāra, do not know form, and do not know feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, so Māra will make a prophecy of them through the controlling power of a name: ‘Once you have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening this will be your name.’ He declares just that name the bodhisattva great beings will have reflected on and considered, so it occurs to those bodhisattva great beings disposed to intellectual confusion and lacking skillful means to think, ‘This very name that I have reflected on and considered will indeed be my name once I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ Just as Māra the wicked one, or the Māra class of gods, or monks controlled by Māra’s power make that declaration, so too it occurs to them to think, ‘This monk has declared my production of the thought and my name exactly as they are. The names match, so the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha has prophesied my unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings do not have those attributes, tokens, or signs of an irreversible bodhisattva great being that I have taught. They are without those attributes, tokens, and signs,  so that declaration of a name makes them conceited and they falsely project their superiority over other bodhisattva great beings and look down on them. Their false sense of superiority, and looking down on and making fun of them make unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening distant. You should know that there are these two levels for those who are thus without skillful means, without the perfection of wisdom, without spiritual friends, and influenced by bad friends, namely, the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level. 
“Alternatively, having wandered for a long, long time through different cycles of existence, thanks to this perfection of wisdom they may fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. But you should know that even if they find the sight of spiritual friends and attend on them with constant joy and rejoicing, if they still do not disparage and do not regret those earlier false productions of the thought, there are two levels for them, namely, the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level.
“To illustrate, Subhūti, when monks incur any one of the four root downfalls, they are not followers of the secluded religious life, are not offspring of the Śākya, and do not have the good fortune in this body to reach any one of the four results of the secluded religious life. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who produce a thought with a false sense of superiority just because of the declaration of a name, who falsely project their superiority over, and look down on, other bodhisattvas just because of that utterance of a name, incur a downfall even more serious than that. You should know that the production of that thought is more serious even than that. Let alone the four serious root downfalls, Subhūti, the production of a thought with a false sense of superiority  just because of the declaration of a bodhisattva’s name is even more serious than the five inexpiable sins. You should know that the production of that thought is even more serious than that. Thus, such works of Māra as subtle as these will occur because of the declaration of a name.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one, declaring the good qualities of isolated bodhisattva great beings, will approach, and having approached, say, ‘The Tathāgata has spoken about the good qualities of isolation.’ 
“Subhūti, I have not said that jungle, upland forest, or frontier retreats are the bodhisattva great beings’ isolation.” 
Subhūti asked, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings are not isolated in jungle, upland forest, or frontier retreats, what other isolation do bodhisattva great beings have? Lord, what other sort of isolation is there for bodhisattva great beings?”
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “if bodhisattva great beings are isolated from attention connected with śrāvakas, are isolated from attention connected with pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattva great beings are in isolation. Subhūti, I have endorsed that as the bodhisattva great beings’ isolation. Living in jungle, forest, and frontier retreats is not the bodhisattva great beings’ isolation. 
“If bodhisattva great beings live day and night in this isolation they truly live in isolation. Bodhisattva great beings—that is, those in the bodhisattva great beings’ isolation—living in jungle, upland forest, and frontier retreats truly live in isolation. Even if these  isolated bodhisattva great beings live on the outskirts of a town they truly live in isolation. Subhūti, about this bodhisattva great beings’ isolation that I have endorsed, Māra the wicked one says, ‘You should live in jungle, upland forest, and frontier retreats.’ Because of that isolation adulterated with attention connected with śrāvakas and with attention connected with pratyekabuddhas, they do not work hard at the perfection of wisdom and do not complete the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Dwelling in the dwelling of such impure attention, they feel a false sense of superiority over bodhisattva great beings other than them, who are dwelling on the outskirts of a town, who nevertheless have pure thoughts and attention, who are unadulterated with attention connected with śrāvakas and unadulterated with attention connected with pratyekabuddhas, and who have completed unadulterated concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, absorptions, and clairvoyances. 
“Furthermore, even if those bodhisattva great beings without skillful means live in wild jungles stretching a hundred yojanas, devoid of predatory animals, game animals, and birds, devoid of the hideouts of thieves, where you do not encounter paths where flesh-eating demons roam for a year, or a hundred years, or a thousand years, or a hundred thousand years, or a hundred thousand one hundred million billion years, or even more than that, still, if they do not know isolation, that isolation in which bodhisattva great beings live having set out with the surpassing aspiration, then those bodhisattva great being are truly adulterated. Living attached to and settling down in that isolation, they are truly  defiled. With just that they do not gladden my mind. They do not have that isolation of the bodhisattva great beings that I have explained. That isolation is not evident in them. And why? Because they do not dwell in that isolation. 
“Māra the wicked one comes into their presence and, standing in the sky above, says, ‘Excellent, excellent, son of a good family. This is the unmistaken isolation taught by the Tathāgata. You should stay right in this isolation and you will quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ Thinking their isolation is even more important than that isolation, they falsely project their superiority over other monks in the Bodhisattva Vehicle, and similarly, connect this with those of good character, thinking, ‘These venerable ones are living an adulterated life.’ They urge on and project their superiority over those bodhisattva great beings who are living a life in isolation, because they think they are those who live adulterated, saying ‘Those who dwell in an adulterated dwelling are not those who practice dwelling in isolation.’ What they should treat with respect they do not treat with respect, and they feel proud of that. And why? Because they think, ‘This life that I live is the truly perfect life, so it would be me the demons would seek to influence, me the demons would cause to hanker after things. As for those living on the outskirts of a town, who would seek to influence them and cause them to hanker after things?’ Those bodhisattvas thus falsely project their superiority over other sons of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle. 
“Subhūti, you should know that they are vulgar bodhisattvas. You should know that they are polluted bodhisattvas. You should know that they are  fake bodhisattvas. You should know that they are the robbers of the world with its gods, humans, and asuras. You should know that they are robbers masquerading as monks in the world with its gods, humans, and asuras. You should know that they are robbers of the sons of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle. You should not worship, should not rely on, and should not serve persons with such a disposition. And why? Subhūti, it is because such persons should be known to have an unfounded conceit. 
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who do not give up the knowledge of all aspects, and do not give up unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—bodhisattva great beings with the surpassing aspiration on account of which those bodhisattva great beings want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and want to work for the welfare of beings—those bodhisattva great beings should not worship, should not rely on, and should not serve persons with such a disposition. They should occupy themselves with a yoga that advances their own aims, otherwise they will always be disgusted with and scared of saṃsāra and unadulterated by the three realms. And they should train, thinking, ‘Right there too I should feel love; and right there too I should feel pity and compassion; and right there too I should produce joy and equanimity. I must act in such a way that one way or the other I will not incur such faults as those, as anyone at all in any way at all, so that they will not be produced, and if they are produced I must quickly eliminate them.’ Subhūti, you should know that this is the courageous advance on account of the personal clairvoyance of the bodhisattva great beings. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with the surpassing aspiration  who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should worship, rely on, and serve spiritual friends.” 
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, whom should they know to be the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings?”
 The Lord said to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, they should know that lord buddhas are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, they should know that bodhisattvas are also the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, they should know that śrāvakas are also the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, they should know that those who speak about, set forth, teach, expound, advance, explain, go into detail about, make clear, and perfectly illuminate the six perfections are also the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, they should know that the six perfections are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings; they should know that the applications of mindfulness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings; and they should know that suchness, the very limit of reality, and the dharma-constituent are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings.
“Subhūti, they should know that the six perfections are the teachers; the six perfections are the path;  the six perfections are the light; the six perfections are the torch; the six perfections are the illumination; the six perfections are intellectual awareness, knowledge, and wisdom; the six perfections are the protector; the six perfections are the refuge; the six perfections are the final ally; the six perfections are the mother; and the six perfections are the father. The applications of mindfulness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects is the elimination of all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions. And why? Subhūti, it is because these thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening were the father and mother of the lord buddhas who were tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in times gone by; because, Subhūti, these thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening will be the father and mother of the lord buddhas who will be tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in times yet to come; and, Subhūti, because these thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are the father and mother of the lord buddhas who are presently dwelling and maintaining themselves in the ten directions. And why? Subhūti, it is because past, future, and present lord buddhas issue forth from them.
“Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, want to purify a buddhafield, and want to bring beings to maturity  should gather beings in the four ways of gathering a retinue. What are the four? They are giving gifts, kind words, beneficial actions, and consistency between words and deeds. Seeing that reality, Subhūti, I too am forced to say that these thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are the teacher, father and mother, resting place and protector, island, refuge, and final ally of the bodhisattva great beings. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to get to a state where they are not led astray by others, who want to remain in that state where they are not led astray by others, who want to allay the doubts of others, who want to purify a buddhafield, and who want to bring beings to maturity should train in this perfection of wisdom. And why? Because in this perfection of wisdom are taught in detail those dharmas in which bodhisattva great beings have to train.” 
The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, what is the mark of the perfection of wisdom?”
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom is like space, unimpeded. Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is without a mark. The perfection of wisdom’s mark does not exist at all.” 
“Lord, could you explain it this way: the mark through which the perfection of wisdom exists is the mark through which all phenomena exist?” asked Subhūti.
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “Subhūti, the mark through which the perfection of wisdom exists is the mark  through which all phenomena exist. And why? Subhūti, it is because all phenomena are isolated from an intrinsic nature, all phenomena are empty of an intrinsic nature. Subhūti, because of this one of many explanations, the mark—that is, the isolated mark and emptiness mark—through which the perfection of wisdom exists is that through which all phenomena exist.”
The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti inquired of him, “Lord, if all phenomena are isolated from all phenomena, and if all phenomena are empty of all phenomena, Lord, how could there be the defilement and purification of beings? Lord, the isolated is not defiled nor is it purified; emptiness is not defiled nor is it purified either, so the isolated and empty do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. The isolated do not apprehend in emptiness any phenomenon that is the awakening to which they will fully awaken, and emptiness does not apprehend in the isolated any phenomenon that is the awakening to which they will fully awaken either, so how are we to understand the meaning of this statement the Lord has made?”
Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord asked him in return, “What do you think, Subhūti, do beings go on grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine’ for a long time?” 
 “So it is, Lord; so it is, Sugata. Beings  go on grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine’ for a long time,” said Subhūti.
“What do you think, Subhūti, are grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine’ isolated? Are grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine’ empty?” asked the Lord.
 “They are isolated, Lord; they are empty, Sugata,” said Subhūti.
“What do you think, Subhūti, do beings pass through many cycles of existence because of grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine’?” asked the Lord.
 “So it is, Lord; so it is, Sugata. Beings pass through many cycles of existence because of grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine’,” said Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “there are therefore beings passing through many cycles of existence, so there is defilement. Those beings who do not grasp at ‘I’ and do not grasp at ‘mine’ and hence are without grasping, Subhūti, they do not pass through many cycles of existence. And those not passing through many cycles of existence, Subhūti, are not defiled, so there is purification as well.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that do not practice in form. They do not practice in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; up to they do not practice in the applications of mindfulness; up to they do not practice in the four detailed and thorough knowledges. And why? Because all those dharmas—those who are practicing, that by means of which they are practicing, and that in which they are practicing— cannot be apprehended. Lord, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras cannot break bodhisattva great beings practicing like that. Lord, none of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas can surpass bodhisattva great beings practicing like that. And why? Because they are located in a place that is unsurpassed, namely, in the secure state of a bodhisattva. Lord, that place is unsurpassed because the bodhisattva great beings keep on paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects. Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that are close to the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 The Lord continued, “What do you think, Subhūti, were all the beings, as many as there are in Jambudvīpa, to obtain human bodies, and, having obtained human bodies, to have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and were a son of a good family or daughter of a good family to attend on them, to respect, revere, honor, and worship them with the requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—for as long as they lived and to have transformed those wholesome roots into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” said Subhūti
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who stays  with attention connected to the perfection of wisdom and speaks about, teaches, expounds, advances, goes into detail about, explains, makes clear, and perfectly illuminates it for others will create a lot more merit than that. 
Similarly, connect this with each, up to were all the beings, as many as there are in a great billionfold world system, to simultaneously obtain human bodies, and were a certain son of a good family or daughter of a good family to establish them in the ten wholesome actions, and in the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, the result of stream enterer, and similarly, connect this with each, up to to establish them in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and to establish them in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and were they to have transformed those wholesome roots into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, what do you think, Subhūti? Based on that, would that son of a good family or daughter of a good family create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” said Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who stays with attention connected to the perfection of wisdom speaking about, teaching, expounding, advancing, going into detail about, explaining, making clear, and perfectly illuminating it for others will create a lot more merit than that. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings will have become worthy of the offerings of all beings. And why? Because apart from the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha, no other being  occupies such a station as the bodhisattva great beings do. Why? Because sons of a good family practicing the perfection of wisdom find and produce within themselves great love; practicing the perfection of wisdom they see all beings as if condemned to execution and find and produce within themselves great compassion; and dwelling in that dwelling, experiencing a delightful feeling of joy they find and produce within themselves great joy, but still they do not dwell together with that causal sign, so they also obtain great equanimity. Subhūti, this—that is, the great illumination of the perfection of wisdom, and the great illumination of the perfection of concentration, perseverance, patience, morality, and giving—is the great illumination of the wisdom of bodhisattva great beings. Even though those sons of a good family have not become buddhas, they have become worthy of the offerings of all beings and are irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They get close to the knowledge of all aspects, so those requirements of theirs come to have a great result, a great benefit.
 “Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to behave so a city’s almsgiving is fruitful, want to guide beings on the path, want to cause a great illumination, want to completely release beings who are in bondage,  and want to reveal the unsurpassed wisdom eye to all beings should dwell in the perfection of wisdom, going over it again and again in their minds. 
 “Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings pay attention with this attention connected to the perfection of wisdom, then, when bodhisattva great beings are paying attention with this attention connected to the perfection of wisdom, they should also engage in conversation connected to just the perfection of wisdom. But even while they are engaged in conversation connected to just the perfection of wisdom, they should also pay attention with this attention connected to the perfection of wisdom. They should act in such a way that they dwell paying attention with this attention connected to the perfection of wisdom, providing no opportunity for any other attention, dwelling, day and night, without giving up endeavoring for this attention connected to the perfection of wisdom. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, say there is a person who has never found a precious jewel before. Later on, they find a precious jewel and become overjoyed, ecstatic, and filled with mental happiness from finding a precious jewel. If, right afterward, they were to lose the precious jewel they had found they would, based on that, experience intense suffering and intense mental unhappiness. Their mind would be constantly and always on that precious jewel, thinking, ‘Oh no! Alas! I have lost my precious jewel.’ Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should think ‘this is a precious jewel’ and never be separated from the attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti inquired of him, “Lord, given that all attention is separated from an intrinsic nature,  that all attention is empty of an intrinsic nature, how, Lord, are bodhisattva great beings never separated from attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects? You cannot apprehend a bodhisattva, attention, or the knowledge of all aspects given that they are separated from an intrinsic nature.”
Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord replied to him, “Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings know this: ‘All phenomena are separated from an intrinsic nature. They are not made by śrāvakas, they are not made by pratyekabuddhas, and they are not made by buddhas. They stay as what they are—the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, and the very limit of reality,’ then those bodhisattva great beings are not separated from the perfection of wisdom. And why? Subhūti, given that the perfection of wisdom is separated from an intrinsic nature and the perfection of wisdom is empty of an intrinsic nature, it is because it has no increase and it has no decline.”
 “Lord, given that the perfection of wisdom is separated from an intrinsic nature and empty of an intrinsic nature, how will bodhisattva great beings succeed at the perfection of wisdom and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “even though they have had success at the perfection of wisdom, they do not become more or less of a bodhisattva great being.  The very limit of reality does not become more or less. The dharma-constituent does not become more or less. And why? Because the perfection of wisdom is not one and it is not two either. Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings do not feel cowed, tense up, tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when such an exposition is being given, they stand on the irreversible level; they are supreme. Those bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom.”
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, is it the emptiness of the perfection of wisdom, its state of ringing hollow, being in vain, being a fraud, and being pointless, that practices the perfection of wisdom?”
 “No it is not, Subhūti,” said the Lord.
 “Lord, can you apprehend any dharma other than the perfection of wisdom that is practicing the perfection of wisdom?” 
 “No you cannot, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, does the perfection of wisdom practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 “No it does not, Subhūti.”
“Lord, does emptiness practice emptiness?” he asked.
 “No it does not, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, does something other than emptiness practice emptiness?”
 “No it does not, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, does form practice the perfection of wisdom? Do feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness  practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 “No they do not, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, do the six perfections practice the perfection of wisdom? And similarly, up to do the four detailed and thorough knowledges practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 “No they do not, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, is it the emptiness of form, its state of ringing hollow, being in vain, being a fraud, and being pointless; its suchness, unmistaken suchness, and unaltered suchness; its true dharmic nature, dharma-constituent, establishment of dharmas, and certification of dharmas; or its very limit of reality that practices the perfection of wisdom?”
 “No it is not, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, similarly, up to is it the emptiness of the four fearlessnesses, their state of ringing hollow, being in vain, being a fraud, or being pointless that practices the perfection of wisdom?”
 “No it is not, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, if those dharmas do not practice the perfection of wisdom, how, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings practice when they practice the perfection of wisdom?”
Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord asked him in return, “What do you think, Subhūti, do you see that dharma which is the dharma practicing the perfection of wisdom?”
 “No I do not, Lord.”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, do you see that perfection of wisdom which bodhisattvas have to practice?”
 “No I do not, Lord.” 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is there any dharma that has been apprehended in that dharma you do not see?
 “No there is not, Lord.”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, in that dharma that has not been apprehended, will there be production or stopping?”
 “No there will not, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, this is the bodhisattva great beings’ forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas. Subhūti, the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of bodhisattva great beings endowed with such forbearance will be prophesied. Subhūti, this is the Tathāgata’s fearlessness and detailed and thorough knowledge, so it is impossible that bodhisattva great beings accomplishing like this, practicing like this, endeavoring like this, making an effort like this will not reach knowledge of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, the great knowledge, the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings have reached forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas and will therefore be set on that until they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” 
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, is the bodhisattvas’ unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening prophesied because there will be the production of all the dharmas?” 
 “No it is not, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, is the bodhisattvas’ unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening prophesied because there will be the nonproduction of all the dharmas?”
 “No it is not, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, if the bodhisattvas’ unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is not prophesied because of the production of all the dharmas, and not because of the nonproduction of all the dharmas, then why, Lord, is the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of bodhisattva great beings prophesied?”
Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord asked him in return, “What do you think, Subhūti, do you see that dharma, the dharma of which unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is being prophesied?”
 “No I do not, Lord,” he replied. “I do not see that dharma, Lord, the dharma of which unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is being prophesied. And, Lord, I also do not see the dharma that is a full awakening, or on account of which there would be a full awakening, or one who becomes fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” he said. “Subhūti, it does not occur to bodhisattva great beings not apprehending all phenomena to think, ‘I will become fully awakened; on account of this I will become fully awakened; I will become fully awakened to this.’ And why? Subhūti, it is because all these ideas do not occur to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom. And why? Subhūti, it is because the perfection of wisdom is without thought construction.” 
This was the fifty-fifth chapter, “Teaching the Stopping of Thought Construction,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 56: Equal Training
Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to the Lord, “Lord, because the perfection of wisdom is extremely isolated this perfection of wisdom is deep, hard to behold, hard to comprehend, not something about which you can speculate, not an object of speculative thought, up to subtle, and an object to be known by the brilliantly learned and wise, so those who hear, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and practice this deep perfection of wisdom for suchness, not giving space to other mind or mental factor dharmas up until they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, do not have paltry wholesome roots.”
“Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Those who hear, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and practice this deep perfection of wisdom for suchness, not giving space to other mind or mental factor dharmas up until they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, do not have paltry wholesome roots.
“Kauśika, what do you think, were the beings in Jambudvīpa, as many as there are, to be endowed with the ten wholesome actions, and to be endowed with the four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions, and yet were some son of a good family or daughter of a good family to take up, bear in mind, read aloud,  and master this deep perfection of wisdom, and having taken up, borne in mind, read aloud, and mastered it, also to practice it for suchness, would that earlier wholesome root not approach that wholesome root even by a hundredth part? Would it not approach it by a thousandth part, by a hundred thousandth part, or by a hundred millionth part? Would it not approach it by any number, fraction, counting, example, or comparison?”
Then a monk said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and practice this deep perfection of wisdom for suchness with an undistracted mind, not giving space to other mind and mental factor dharmas up until they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, surpass beings in Jambudvīpa endowed with the ten wholesome actions, endowed with the four concentrations and four immeasurables, endowed with the four formless absorptions, and endowed with the five clairvoyances.”
 That monk having said this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, replied to him, “Monk, given that the bodhisattva great beings who have produced even one thought surpass beings in Jambudvīpa endowed with the ten wholesome actions, endowed with the four concentrations and four immeasurables, endowed with the four formless absorptions, and endowed with the five clairvoyances, what need is there to mention those who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, and master this deep perfection of wisdom, and having taken up, borne in mind, read aloud, and mastered it, also practice it for suchness? They will surpass the world with its gods, humans,  and asuras. Bodhisattva great beings will surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras. The bodhisattva great beings will not simply surpass the world with its gods, humans, and asuras in one respect but not another; they will surpass all the stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas, as many as there are. The bodhisattva great beings will not simply surpass the stream enterers, up to the pratyekabuddhas in one respect but not another; they will surpass all those bodhisattva great beings without skillful means and separated from the perfection of wisdom practicing the perfection of giving. And they will not simply surpass those practicing the perfection of giving in one respect but not another; they will surpass all those bodhisattva great beings without skillful means and separated from the perfection of wisdom practicing the perfection of morality. And they will not simply surpass those practicing the perfection of morality in one respect but not another; they will surpass all those bodhisattva great beings without skillful means separated from the perfection of wisdom practicing the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, and the perfection of concentration. Those bodhisattva great beings who are practicing the perfection of wisdom as it has been taught cannot be surpassed by the world with its gods, humans,  and asuras. Those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom as it has been taught carry out the perfection of wisdom as it has been taught. Those bodhisattva great beings ensure that the line of the knowledge of all aspects will be unbroken. Those bodhisattva great beings do not distance themselves from the Tathāgata. Those bodhisattva great beings practicing like that will not turn back from the site of awakening. Those bodhisattva great beings want to lift up beings who are depressed. Those bodhisattvas who train like that train in a bodhisattva’s training. They do not train in the training of a śrāvaka; they do not train in the training of a pratyekabuddha.
 “The Four Mahārājas will think about approaching bodhisattva great beings who train like that, and having come into their presence, they will say, ‘Make haste at training! Train quickly! The tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas of yore took possession of these four begging bowls, so you too, seated at the site of awakening, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, should take possession of them as well.’ The Four Mahārājas together with the Cāturmahā­rājika gods think about approaching bodhisattva great beings training like that in the perfection of wisdom. I together with the Trāyastriṃśa gods think about coming. The god Suyāma together with the Yāma gods think about coming. The god Saṃtuṣita together with the Tuṣita gods think about coming. Similarly, the god Sunirmita . . . , Vaśavartin . . . , Sahāṃpati . . . , and Brahmā together with the Brahmakāyika gods also think about coming. Similarly, the god Ābhāsvara together with the Ābhāsvara gods also think about coming. Similarly, the Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, Avṛha, Atapa, Sudarśana, Sudṛśa, up to the Śuddhāvāsa gods also think about coming. The tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas continually watch over those bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom. The bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom like that do not face those ordinary physical sufferings, as many as there are, from being attacked by any others at all, in any way at all. 
 “These, monk, are the good qualities during this life of bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom.
 “Their bodies will not be beset with disorders from the three humors in combination, as many as there are—that is, by eye diseases, ear diseases, nose diseases, tongue diseases, diseases of the teeth, physical illnesses, or mental illnesses. These too are the good qualities that can be expected when bodhisattva great beings are practicing this deep perfection of wisdom.”
 Then it occurred to venerable Ānanda to think, “Are these Śatakratus, heads of the gods, teaching the perfection of wisdom through the power of their own confident readiness, or are they teaching through the power of the Buddha?” 
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to venerable Ānanda, said  to venerable Ānanda, “Venerable monk Ānanda, you should be aware that this teaching of mine of the perfection of wisdom is through the power of the Buddha.”
 Then the Lord said to venerable Ānanda, “It is exactly so, venerable monk Ānanda, exactly so! It is through the power of the Tathāgata that Śatakratu, head of the gods, gives such a teaching of the perfection of wisdom as this. It is through the sustaining power of the Tathāgata. Ānanda, when bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom, do the yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom, and meditate on the perfection of wisdom, then all the Māras, the wicked ones, in the great billionfold world system feel anxious, wondering, ‘Will these bodhisattvas actualize the very limit of reality, and actualizing the very limit of reality will they actualize the result of stream enterer, or will they actualize the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or will they reach a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or will they rather fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’ Furthermore, Ānanda, when bodhisattva great beings are inseparable from the perfection of wisdom, then Māra the wicked one experiences a sharp stab of pain. Moreover, Ānanda, Māra the wicked one frightens bodhisattva great beings by sending a shower of meteors to destroy their feeling of self-confidence, to make their hair stand on end, to cow them, and to distract them from producing even a single thought of paying attention to the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 Then venerable Ānanda asked the Lord, “Lord, does Māra the wicked one come into the presence of all bodhisattva great beings bent on hurting them?”
 “Ānanda, replied the Lord, “Māra the wicked one does not come into the presence of all bodhisattva great beings bent on hurting them. Ānanda, Māra the wicked one comes into the presence of some bodhisattva great beings bent on hurting them and does not come into the presence of others.”
 “Lord, who are the bodhisattva great beings into whose presence Māra the wicked one comes bent on hurting them, and who are those into whose presence he does not come?” asked venerable Ānanda.
 “Ānanda,” replied the Lord, “if in the past when this deep perfection of wisdom was being explained the minds of those bodhisattva great beings were not filled with belief, then Māra the wicked one will come into their presence bent on hurting them. 
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, if when this deep perfection of wisdom is being explained those bodhisattva great beings wonder whether this is the perfection of wisdom, or whether it is not the perfection of wisdom, then, Ānanda, Māra the wicked one will also come into the presence of those bodhisattva great beings bent on hurting them. 
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, when bodhisattva great beings have become separated from spiritual friends they do not see them, so they do not hear this deep perfection of wisdom. Not hearing it they do not know it, and because they do not know it, they do not practice it for suchness, thinking, ‘This is how to cultivate the perfection of wisdom.’
 “Furthermore,  Ānanda, when bodhisattva great beings have become separated from the perfection of wisdom, they look after a false Dharma and Māra the wicked one, Ānanda, finds an opportunity to hurt those bodhisattva great beings.
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, when bodhisattva great beings who have become separated from the perfection of wisdom praise a false Dharma, it occurs to Māra the wicked one to think, ‘That one praising a false Dharma is my fellow traveler. From among the many in the Bodhisattva Vehicle, in this person praising a false Dharma I have found a fellow traveler. That one will fulfill my ambition that those in the Bodhisattva Vehicle will stand on two levels, namely the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level.’
 “Again, Ānanda, what sorts of bodhisattva great beings will Māra the wicked one get an opportunity to hurt? Ānanda, Māra the wicked one will get an opportunity to hurt those bodhisattvas who, when this deep perfection of wisdom is being explained, say, ‘This perfection of wisdom is so deep someone like you is not going to find the bottom of it, whether you have heard it, explained it, borne it in mind, read it aloud, mastered it, or completed it, because until now even I have not found it.’ 
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, Māra the wicked one will get an opportunity to hurt bodhisattva great beings when the bodhisattvas falsely project superiority over other bodhisattvas, saying, ‘I am practicing the perfection of giving but you are not practicing the perfection of giving,’ and similarly, connect this with each, up to falsely project superiority, saying,  ‘I am practicing the perfection of wisdom but you are not practicing the perfection of wisdom.’
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, when bodhisattva great beings have it in mind to brag about themselves, Māra the wicked one feels joy and is pleased, delighted, enraptured, overjoyed, and glad, and Māra the wicked one, Ānanda, gets an opportunity to hurt those bodhisattva great beings. 
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, when those bodhisattva great beings whose names are mentioned or whose lineage is mentioned, whose name or lineage is celebrated and mentioned, falsely project superiority over other fine bodhisattvas of virtuous character, bragging about themselves and disparaging others, they are without any of the good qualities that are the attributes, tokens, and signs of irreversible bodhisattva great beings, and in the absence of those attributes, tokens, and signs, cause affliction, bragging about themselves and disparaging others. They say, ‘You do not show yourself to be in the Bodhisattva Vehicle and bodhisattva family in the way that I show myself to be in the Bodhisattva Vehicle and bodhisattva family.’ When they look down on and disparage persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle like that, it occurs to Māra the wicked one to think, ‘My place will not be empty, there will be an increase in the great hells, the animal world, the world of Yama, and the region of ghosts.’ Māra the wicked one employs his controlling power so that the words of those bodhisattva great beings become more and more believable.  Many people come to think that they should listen to those words that have become believable. Listening to them, they come to think that they should trust them. They watch them and sing the same tune as them. Having watched them, they behave in conformity with them, training just like them. Having trained just like them, they will have accomplished something just like them, so they cause affliction to increase. Thus every action of body, speech, and mind they have undertaken leads to unwanted, disagreeable, and unpleasant states because their minds have become distorted, and so the great hells also increase; the animal world, the world of Yama, and the region of ghosts also increase; and Māra the wicked one’s place also increases. Ānanda, Māra the wicked one, seeing that cause and effect, feels delighted, enraptured, overjoyed, and glad.
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, if a person in the Bodhisattva Vehicle quarrels with a person in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, it occurs to Māra the wicked one to think, ‘Ah! These sons of a good family are distancing themselves from the knowledge of all aspects. They are not getting closer to the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because battling, fault finding, fighting, and quarreling are not the path to the knowledge of all aspects; rather, because they are not the path to the knowledge of all aspects, they are the path to the great hells, the path to the animal world, and the path to the world of Yama.’ 
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, if a person in the Bodhisattva Vehicle should battle, find fault, fight, and quarrel with another person in the Bodhisattva Vehicle,  it occurs to Māra the wicked one to think, ‘Ah! Both these sons of a good family are distancing themselves from the knowledge of all aspects. Both will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Because what these sons of a good family have undertaken is not the path to the knowledge of all aspects; rather, what these sons of a good family have undertaken is the path to the hells, the path to the animal world, and the path to the world of Yama.’ 
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, if bodhisattvas whose awakening has not been prophesied entertain a malicious thought about other bodhisattvas who have been prophesied and battle, pick a fight with, find fault with, quarrel with, and wage war against them, if they have not given up the knowledge of all aspects, they will have to buckle on armor for as many eons as they have entertained the thought of battling, fault finding, fighting, and quarreling.” 
 The Lord having said this, venerable Ānanda asked him, “Lord, is there a release for those who entertain those thoughts, or do they have to buckle on armor for exactly that many eons?”
 Venerable Ānanda having asked this, the Lord replied to him, “Ānanda, I have taught a Dharma where there is a release for persons in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and in the Bodhisattva Vehicle. There, if persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle fight with, quarrel with, intimidate, and humiliate others in the Bodhisattva Vehicle, and having fought and quarreled with, intimidated and humiliated them, still do not make a confession, letting it fester  and harboring a bad proclivity, I do not say, Ānanda, that there is a release for those persons. And if those persons do not give up the knowledge of all aspects, they will definitely have to buckle on armor for that many eons. 
 “Moreover, Ānanda, even if bodhisattva great beings have fought and quarreled, intimidated and humiliated, still, if they make a confession, do not let it fester, and do not harbor a bad proclivity, and if they think, ‘Were I, who have to remove all beings from suffering, to speak back to someone who speaks to me, and were I, who should thus act as a bridge for all beings, to speak unkind words to others and reply negatively, it would be improper, so I must not act like that. I should stay still with a sheep-like obtuseness and say nothing. I must not disturb my surpassing aspiration that I have to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and place all beings in complete nirvāṇa, so it is not proper that I am entertaining a malicious thought about them, that I am upsetting them, so I should not entertain a malicious thought about them and I should not upset them,’ and if from then on they also keep restraint, Ānanda, then I say that those bodhisattva great beings are those for whom there is a release and Māra the wicked one will not get an opportunity to hurt them. 
 “Furthermore, Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings should not live together with persons in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, and if they do live with them still they should not entertain a malicious thought toward anyone. And why? Because those who entertain a malicious thought toward them, or who would upset them, are not agreeable to me. And why? Because I think it is necessary that having fully awakened  to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening they should attain liberation from all suffering.”
 Then venerable Ānanda asked the Lord, “Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings behave toward persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle?”
 “Ānanda,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings should behave toward persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle just as they would behave toward the Teacher. And why? They think, ‘It is because they are my fellow travelers, they have set out in the same vehicle, and what they have to train in, I have to train in just that too—that perfection of giving, up to that knowledge of all aspects that they have to train in, I have to train in too. If they practice an adulterated practice separated from attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects, I will not train in that, but if this bodhisattva great being practices inseparable from attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects, I will practice like that too.’ Bodhisattva great beings training like that become those with the same training.”
This was the fifty-sixth chapter, “Equal Training,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 57: Practice
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, what is the sameness of bodhisattva great beings, the sameness in which bodhisattva great beings have to train?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “inner emptiness . . . connect this in the same way with each, up to and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is the sameness of bodhisattva great beings. Form is empty of form. Feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness is empty of consciousness, and similarly, up to also awakening is empty of awakening. Subhūti, that is the sameness of bodhisattva great beings, and stationed in that sameness bodhisattva great beings will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” 
 Subhūti then asked, “Lord, when bodhisattva great beings train to put an end to form do they train in the knowledge of all aspects, when they train to become detached from form do they train in the knowledge of all aspects, when they train for the cessation of form do they train in the knowledge of all aspects, and when they train so that form will not be produced do they train in the knowledge of all aspects? And similarly, up to when they train to put an end to the four detailed and thorough knowledges do they train in the knowledge of all aspects, and similarly, up to and when they train so that the four detailed and thorough knowledges will not be produced do they train in the knowledge of all aspects? When they train to put an end to feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do they train in the knowledge of all aspects, up to when they train so that they will not be produced do they train in the knowledge of all aspects? Or when they train to put an end to, become detached from, for the cessation of, up to awakening, up to so that they will not be produced do they train in the knowledge of all aspects?” Connect this in the same way, at length, with them all.
 Venerable Subhūti having inquired about this, the Lord replied to him, “Subhūti, you have said, ‘When they train to put an end to form do they train in the knowledge of all aspects, up to when they train so it will not be produced do they train in the knowledge of all aspects? When they train to put an end to feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness do they train in the knowledge of all aspects, up to when they train so that they will not be produced do they train in the knowledge of all aspects? When they train to put an end to, become detached from, for the cessation of, up to awakening so they will not be produced do they train in the knowledge of all aspects? Connect this in the same way, at length, with them all.’
 “Subhūti, what do you think—is there an end to, a cessation of, or a diminution in that suchness that is the suchness of form, of feeling, of perception, of volitional factors, and of consciousness; connect this in the same way with each, up to that suchness that is the suchness of awakening, that is the suchness of the Tathāgata, on account of which suchness they are labeled the Tathāgata?”
 “No, Lord; no, Sugata,” said Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings training like that, training in suchness, train in the knowledge of all aspects, and suchness neither ends, nor ceases, nor diminishes. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that, training in suchness, train in the knowledge of all aspects.  Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that, training in suchness, train in the six perfections. They train in the applications of mindfulness, connect this in the same way with each, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, up to the knowledge of all aspects. Subhūti, Māra or the Māra class of gods cannot break bodhisattva great beings training like that. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that reach the irreversible state extremely quickly. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that range over their own father’s, the Tathāgata’s, range. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that practice the dharmas that dispel darkness. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that practice the dharmas that purify a buddhafield. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that train in great love, train in great compassion, train in order to purify a buddhafield, and train in order to bring beings to maturity. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that train to turn the wheel of the Dharma that has twelve aspects three times. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that train with the thought ‘I will place beings in complete nirvāṇa.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that train so the line of the tathāgatas  will be unbroken. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that train with the thought ‘I will open the gate to immortality,’ and train with the thought ‘I will perfectly reveal the uncompounded element.’ 
 “Subhūti, inferior beings are incapable of training in this training. The bodhisattva great beings who train in this training want to extricate all beings from saṃsāra. Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings training like that are not born in hell; are not born in the animal world, in the world of Yama, or in the border areas; and are not born in outcaste families, with a missing limb, crippled, deaf, with a goiter, or with one side of the body withered away. They will not have incomplete sense organs; their sense organs will be complete, not incomplete. They will not be involved with killing, up to have a wrong view, will not fashion a life on wrong livelihood, will not hold onto the unreal, will not be immoral, and will not hold on to immorality. 
 “Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings training like that are not born among the long-lived gods. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings have skillful means—a skillful means so that even though they become absorbed in the concentrations, become absorbed in the immeasurables, and become absorbed in the formless absorptions, still the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions do not dictate where they are born.
 “Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings training like that  attain the perfect purity of the power of all the buddhadharmas, which is to say, they do so because the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels have been perfectly purified.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, if all dharmas are in their basic nature perfectly pure, what dharma’s perfect purity do bodhisattva great beings attain?”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “It is exactly as you say, Subhūti, all dharmas are in their basic nature perfectly pure. Subhūti, when, even with all dharmas being perfectly pure, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not feel cowed and do not tense up, that is the perfection of wisdom of those bodhisattva great beings. Ordinary persons do not understand and do not see that true nature of dharmas, so for the sake of those beings the bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of giving, up to practice the perfection of wisdom, and, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings practicing all dharmas like that accomplish the powers and fearlessnesses. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that go beyond the continually moving thought activity of all beings. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, there are not many places on the great earth where shiny nuggets of Jambū River gold and silver crop up. Similarly, there are not many beings practicing this practice—namely, the perfection of wisdom. Far more than them are the beings standing on the śrāvaka and  pratyekabuddha levels. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, there are not many beings who take up and remain at the work that transforms them into a wheel-turning emperor. Far more than them are the beings who take up and remain at the work that transforms them into local rulers. Similarly, Subhūti, there are not many beings who have set out on the path to the knowledge of all aspects. Far more than them are the beings who have set out on the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha paths. Subhūti, there are far fewer bodhisattva great beings who practice for suchness than there are bodhisattva great beings who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and far more than them are those who will be in the state of a śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha. Subhūti, far more than the sons of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle standing in the perfection of wisdom who will attain the irreversible level are those who will not attain the irreversible level. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to reach the irreversible level and want to be counted among those at the irreversible level should train in this deep perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not produce a thought associated with miserliness, do not produce a thought associated with immorality, do not produce a thought associated with disturbance, do not produce a thought associated with laziness, do not produce a thought associated with distraction, do not produce a thought associated with intellectual confusion, do not produce a thought associated with greed, do not produce a thought associated with hatred, do not produce a thought  associated with confusion, and do not produce a thought associated with hardheartedness. They do not produce a thought associated with form, and do not produce a thought associated with feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; similarly, connect this with each, up to they do not produce a thought associated with awakening. And why? Subhūti, it is because bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom do not apprehend any phenomenon, and while not apprehending do not produce any thought about any phenomenon. Bodhisattva great beings thus practicing this deep perfection of wisdom, Subhūti, have perfectly taken up all the perfections, have perfectly succeeded at all the perfections, and all the perfections accompany them. And why? Subhūti, it is because all the perfections are included within this deep perfection of wisdom. To illustrate, Subhūti, the sixty-two views are included in the view of the perishable collection. Similarly, Subhūti, all the perfections are included within this deep perfection of wisdom. To illustrate further, Subhūti, when a person’s time to die has come and the life faculty shuts down, all the other faculties will shut down as well. Similarly, Subhūti, all the perfections accompany bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to go to the other side of all the perfections should train in this deep perfection of wisdom.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom train for the highest state  of all beings. Subhūti, what do you think, are there a lot of beings in a great billionfold world system?”
 “Lord, given that just the beings of Jambudvīpa are many, what need is there to say more about beings in a great billionfold world system? There are a lot, Sugata, a lot,” he replied.
 “Subhūti,” he continued, “were all the beings, as many as there are in a great billionfold world system, to have simultaneously obtained human bodies and to have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and were some bodhisattva great being to have attended on each of those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas for as long as they live with the requirements—robes, alms, beds and seats, and medicines for sicknesses—what do you think? Based on that, would that bodhisattva great being create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” he replied.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, and properly pay attention to this deep perfection of wisdom create even more merit than that. And why? Subhūti, it is because this perfection of wisdom of the bodhisattva great beings brings about unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, serving a great purpose. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to become the best of all beings, who want to become a protector of beings without a protector, who want to be a refuge of those without a refuge, who want to be a final ally of those without a final ally, who want to be a lamp for those standing in darkness, who want to reach the state of a buddha, who want to have reached the range of a buddha, who want to live the life of a buddha, who want to roar the buddha lion’s roar, who want to beat the big buddha drum, who want to blow the buddha conch, and who want to engage in buddha discourse should thus train in this deep perfection of wisdom. And why? Subhūti, it is because there is no perfect state that bodhisattva great beings training in the perfection of wisdom have to obtain that they have not obtained.”
 “Do they even have to obtain a śrāvaka’s perfect state, and do they even have to obtain a pratyekabuddha’s perfect state?” asked Subhūti.
 The Lord said, “Even though they even have to obtain a śrāvaka’s perfect state, and even though they even have to obtain a pratyekabuddha’s perfect state, still they do not stand there and do not stay there. With knowledge and seeing they have to look and transcend, and they have to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that get close to the knowledge of all aspects and will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Bodhisattva great beings training like that are worthy of the offerings of the world with its gods, humans, and asuras. Subhūti,  bodhisattva great beings training like that surpass those others who are worthy of the offerings—all theśrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, as many as there are—and get close to the knowledge of all aspects. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training like that do not give up the perfection of wisdom, practice the perfection of wisdom, and are not separated from the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, you should know that the attribute of bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom like that is not abandoning the knowledge of all aspects. They distance themselves from the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level and get close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “If it occurs to them to think, ‘This is the perfection of wisdom. In this perfection of wisdom, on account of this perfection of wisdom, I will accomplish the knowledge of all aspects’—if they form such a notion—they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom. But if they do not have the notion, ‘This is the perfection of wisdom. The perfection of wisdom is here’—if they do not know and do not see whose perfection of wisdom it would be, on account of what it would be a perfection of wisdom, and who, with the perfection of wisdom, would go forth and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—and if it also occurs to them to think, ‘The dharma-constituent, suchness, and the very limit of reality remain, so this is not the perfection of wisdom, and the perfection of wisdom is not here, and there is no dharma at all that goes forth on account of this perfection of wisdom,’ in that case, Subhūti, the bodhisattva  great beings practicing like that are practicing the perfection of wisdom.” 
This was the fifty-seventh chapter, “Practice,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 58: Exposition of the Absence of Thought Construction
Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods, to think, “Here, since even bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom, connect this in the same way with each, up to and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha surpass all beings, what need is there to say more about when they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Since those beings whose thought is going toward the knowledge of all aspects get things easily and stay alive easily, what need is there to say more about those who have produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? The beings who will have produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are pleasing to me. The beings who produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are also pleasing to me.” 
 Thinking that, Śatakratu, head of the gods, took up coral tree flowers and approached the Lord. Going close he strewed those coral tree flowers near, strewed them around the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha, and having strewed them in front and strewed them around him, made this statement: “On account of this wholesome root may those persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle holding unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening as a support complete the buddhadharmas;  may they also complete the dharmas of the knowledge of all aspects, may they complete just these self-originated dharmas, and on account of this may they complete the uncontaminated qualities. Lord, I do not produce even the mere arising of a thought that those persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Lord, I do not produce even the mere arising of a thought that those bodhisattva great beings turn back from awakening and become śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas; rather, that the bodhisattvas wanting the welfare, benefit, and security of the world with its gods, humans, and asuras would, having seen those sufferings of those wandering through cycles of existence, produce a longing for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and would thus produce the thought, and would make this fervent prayer that is a vow for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening: ‘One way or the other I, who have gone beyond, must liberate beings who have not gone beyond; one way or the other I, who have been freed, must free beings who have not been freed; one way or the other I, who have sighed with relief, must give beings who have not sighed with relief a sigh of relief; and one way or the other I, who have passed into nirvāṇa, must cause beings who have not passed into nirvāṇa to pass into complete nirvāṇa.’
 “Lord, how big is the wholesome root grown by those sons of a good family and daughters of a good family who rejoice in the thought of enlightenment of bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the Bodhisattva Vehicle, who rejoice in the thought of enlightenment of bodhisattva great beings who have practiced in the Bodhisattva Vehicle for a long distance, who rejoice in the thought of enlightenment of bodhisattva great beings  who are irreversible, and who rejoice in the thought of enlightenment of bodhisattva great beings who are interrupted by a single birth?”
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, having asked about this, the Lord replied to him, “Kauśika, it is possible you can take the measure of a four-continent world system by weighing it against some unit of weight, but the measure of the merit of those thoughts that has arisen from the presence of rejoicing is not like that. Kauśika, it is possible you can take the measure of the oceans in a great billionfold world system by taking each drop of water out with the tip of a strand of hair split into a hundred finer strands, but the measure of the merit of those thoughts that has arisen from the presence of rejoicing is not like that.” 
 The Lord having said this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to him, “Lord, those beings who will not rejoice in those thoughts will be possessed by Māra. Lord, those beings who will not rejoice in those thoughts will be on the side of Māra. Lord, those beings who will not rejoice in those thoughts came here having died where Māra dwells. And why? Lord, it is because those beings who find and produce rejoicing within themselves for those thoughts, turning it over to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, are those who pulverize the dwelling of Māra. Lord, those  thoughts that produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are the ones in which they should rejoice. Lord, those who have not given up the Buddha, who have not given up the Dharma, and who have not given up the Saṅgha, they too should rejoice in these thoughts, and, having rejoiced, one way or the other they should turn it over to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in such a way that there is no notion of duality and no notion of nonduality.”
 “Exactly so, Kauśika, exactly so! It is exactly as you say!” said the Lord. “Kauśika, those who rejoice in those thoughts will please the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas extremely quickly, and having pleased them they will not again displease them. Those endowed with the wholesome roots from those thoughts arisen from the presence of rejoicing will become respected, revered, honored, and worshiped wherever they are born. They will never, ever see a form not pleasing to the mind, hear a sound not pleasing to the mind, smell a smell not pleasing to the mind, taste a taste not pleasing to the mind, feel a feeling not pleasing to the mind, or become conscious of a dharma not pleasing to the mind. They will never, ever be separated from the lord buddhas. They will pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield and also attend on those lord buddhas and produce wholesome roots. 
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family have rejoiced in the wholesome roots of countless bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the Bodhisattva Vehicle  and turned the merit over to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; have rejoiced in the wholesome roots of bodhisattva great beings standing on the first level, standing on the second level, up to and standing on the tenth level; up to and have rejoiced in the wholesome roots of bodhisattva great beings who are interrupted by a single birth and turned the merit over to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They get close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because their wholesome roots have grown, and having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening they then cause immeasurable, incalculable, infinite beings to enter into complete nirvāṇa. 
 “Kauśika, because of this one of many explanations, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family should rejoice in the wholesome roots of bodhisattva great beings who have produced the first thought, turn the merit over to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and one way or the other they should turn it over in such a way that awakening will not be in that thought, nor in another thought either. They should rejoice in the wholesome roots of bodhisattva great beings who have practiced the practice, who are irreversible, and who are interrupted by a single birth; turn the merit over to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and one way or the other they should turn it over in such a way that awakening will not be in that thought, nor in any other thought either.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, in what way will a thought that is like an illusion fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord asked him in return,  “Subhūti, what do you think, do you see that thought that is like an illusion?”
 “Lord, I do not see it,” he said. “Lord, I do not see an illusion or an illusion-like thought either.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, will that thought—that thought in which you do not see illusion or illusion-like thought—fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, do you see a dharma different than an illusion and an illusion-like thought that will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No, Lord,” he said. “Lord, I do not see a dharma other than an illusion and an illusion-like thought that will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and given that I do not see another dharma, Lord, what dharma will I teach to ‘exist’ or ‘not exist’? The dharma that is extremely isolated will not be existent or nonexistent; the dharma that is extremely isolated will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and a dharma that does not exist will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening either. And why? Lord, it is because all those dharmas that are defiled or purified do not exist and are not apprehended. And why?  Lord, it is because the perfection of wisdom is also extremely isolated, and similarly, up to the perfection of giving is also extremely isolated, and similarly, up to and awakening is also extremely isolated, and a dharma that is extremely isolated is not something you cultivate and not something you analyze. The perfection of wisdom is extremely isolated so it does not bring about any dharma, and given that the perfection of wisdom is extremely isolated, how will bodhisattva great beings, thanks to the perfection of wisdom, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Given that unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is extremely isolated, how will there be a realization of the isolated by the isolated?”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord said to him, “Excellent, excellent, Subhūti! Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! The perfection of wisdom is extremely isolated, the perfection of concentration is extremely isolated, and similarly, up to the perfection of morality is extremely isolated, the perfection of giving is extremely isolated, and similarly, up to awakening is extremely isolated, and the knowledge of all aspects is extremely isolated. Subhūti, just as the perfection of wisdom is extremely isolated, up to the knowledge of all aspects is extremely isolated, so too is full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening extremely isolated. Subhūti, were the perfection of wisdom not extremely isolated, and similarly, connect this with each, up to were the knowledge of all aspects  not extremely isolated, it would not be the perfection of wisdom, up to it would not be the knowledge of all aspects. Therefore, Subhūti, in line with the perfection of wisdom being extremely isolated, up to the knowledge of all aspects being extremely isolated, so too, Subhūti, there will be no full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening thanks to the perfection of wisdom. There is no full awakening to the isolated by the isolated. Still there is full awakening, but there is no full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening unless it is thanks to the perfection of wisdom.”
 “Lord, bodhisattva great beings practice a deep reality,” said Subhūti.
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practice the two deep realities. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who practice a deep reality but do not actualize that reality—namely, the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level—are those who do what is difficult.”
 Subhūti then said, “The way I understand the meaning of what you, Lord, have said, is that bodhisattva great beings are not those who do what is difficult. And why? Lord, it is because a reality to be actualized cannot be apprehended, the perfection of wisdom through which it might be realized cannot be apprehended, and the phenomenon that might actualize cannot be apprehended either. Lord, given that all phenomena cannot be apprehended, what reality will be awakened to,  what perfection of wisdom will be awakened to, what phenomenon will be awakened to, and what will have been realized such that unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening will be awakened to?
 “Lord, this course of action where nothing is apprehended is the course of action of bodhisattvas. Bodhisattva great beings practicing it reach a freedom from darkness in respect to all phenomena. Lord, if bodhisattva great beings’ minds are not cowed, if they do not tense up, tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when there is an exposition of this, the bodhisattva great beings practicing like that, Lord, are practicing the perfection of wisdom. They do not see a causal sign, they also do not see the perfection of wisdom, and they also do not see that ‘I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ Lord, it does not occur to those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘I am distant from the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, but I am close to the knowledge of all aspects.’ 
 “To illustrate, Lord, it does not occur to a space to think, ‘I am near one thing and distant from another.’ And why? Lord, it is because a space does not have specific features, because a space is without thought construction. Similarly, Lord, it does not occur to the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘I am distant from the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, but I am close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’  And why? Lord, it is because the perfection of wisdom is without thought construction.
 “To illustrate further, Lord, it does not occur to an illusory person to think, ‘I am distant from the illusion but close to the magician,’ or ‘I am close to’ or ‘distant from the crowd of people who have gathered together.’ And why? Lord, it is because an illusory person is without thought construction. 
 “To illustrate further, Lord, it does not occur to a reflection in a mirror to think, ‘I am close to the objective support on account of which this reflection has arisen, but I am distant from those that have not arisen in that mirror or container of water.’ And why? Lord, it is because a reflection in a mirror is without thought construction. Similarly, Lord, it does not occur to a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘I am distant from the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, but I am close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ And why? Because the perfection of wisdom is without thought construction. 
 “Lord, the perfection of wisdom does not have likes or dislikes. And why? Because an intrinsic nature that is likable or dislikable cannot be apprehended in it. To illustrate, Lord, just as tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas  do not have anything they might like or dislike, similarly the perfection of wisdom does not have anything it might like or dislike. To illustrate, Lord, just as a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha has abandoned all thought construction, similarly, Lord, the perfection of wisdom has abandoned all thought construction because it is without thought construction. 
 “To illustrate further, Lord, it does not occur to a tathāgata’s magical creation to think, ‘I am distant from the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level, but I am close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ And why? Lord, it is because a tathāgata and a tathāgata’s magical creation are without thought construction. Similarly, Lord, it does not occur to a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘I am distant from the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level but I am close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ And why? It is because the perfection of wisdom is without thought construction. 
 “To illustrate further, Lord, a tathāgata creates a magical creation, but even when that magical creation does that deed it was created to do, still it is without conceptualization and without thought construction. Similarly, Lord, the perfection of wisdom too is cultivated for what it does, but even when it does what it does, still that perfection of wisdom is without conceptualization and without thought construction.
 “To illustrate further, Lord, a skilled contractor or contractor’s apprentice puts together a contraption in the shape of a woman, or in the shape of a man, or in the shape of an elephant,  or in the shape of a bull. It is made for what the contraption does, but even when it does what it does, still that contraption is without conceptualization and without thought construction.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, is only the perfection of wisdom without conceptualization and without thought construction, or is the perfection of concentration also without conceptualization and without thought construction, up to is the perfection of giving without conceptualization and without thought construction too?” 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, . . . up to the perfection of giving is without conceptualization and without thought construction too,” said Subhūti.
 “Well then, Venerable Subhūti,” Śāriputra further inquired, “is form without conceptualization and without thought construction, and are feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness also without conceptualization and without thought construction? Venerable Subhūti, are the eyes without conceptualization and without thought construction, and are the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind also without conceptualization and without thought construction? Venerable Subhūti, is a form without conceptualization and without thought construction, and are a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas also without conceptualization and without thought construction? Is eye consciousness, up to thinking-mind consciousness; eye contact, up to thinking-mind contact; and feeling that arises from the condition of contact with the eyes, up to feeling that arises from the condition of contact with the thinking mind also without conceptualization and without thought construction? Venerable Subhūti, are the concentrations,  immeasurables, and formless absorptions also without conceptualization and without thought construction? Are the applications of mindfulness, connect this in the same way with each, up to the eightfold noble path, and the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization also without conceptualization and without thought construction? Are the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, and great compassion without conceptualization and without thought construction; up to and are the eighteen distinct attributes of an awakened one and an awakened one also without conceptualization and without thought construction? Is awakening also without conceptualization and without thought construction? Are the compounded element and the uncompounded element also without conceptualization and without thought construction?”
 “Venerable Śāriputra, all phenomena are without conceptualization and without thought construction,” said Subhūti.
 Śāriputra further asked, “Venerable Subhūti, if all phenomena are without conceptualization and without thought construction, how has this division of cyclic existence into the five forms of life—in the hells, animal world, world of Yama, and as a human and god—come about, and how do the categorizations of stream enterer, up toawakening of the lord buddhas come about?” 
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked this, venerable Subhūti replied to him, “Venerable Śāriputra, these beings pile up karmic actions of body, speech, and mind motivated by error. Based on that they saddle themselves with, and pile up, karmic maturations that have arisen from the root—the desire-to-do. Saddled with them they enact the forms of life arisen from thought construction in the hells,  animal world, world of Yama, and as a human and god. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, you have said, ‘How do the categorizations of stream enterer, once-returner, non-returner, worthy one, and pratyekabuddha come about, up to how does the categorization of lord buddha come about?’ Venerable Śāriputra, stream enterer and result of stream enterer are categories because of being without thought construction, up tothe state of a worthy one, the state of a pratyekabuddha and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening are categories because of being without thought construction; buddha is a category because of being without thought construction, and awakening too is a category because of being without thought construction. 
 “Venerable Śāriputra, those lord buddhas, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas who have appeared in times past, were also without thought construction, were free from thought construction, and had abandoned thought construction. Similarly, those in the future will abandon thought construction, and, Venerable Śāriputra, those lord buddhas who have appeared at the present time, the lord buddhas who have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in world systems in the ten directions, they too are without thought construction, are free from thought construction, and have abandoned thought construction. Because of this one of many explanations, Venerable Śāriputra, having taken the suchness that is the absence of thought construction, the suchness that is the very limit of reality, and the suchness that is the dharma-constituent as authority, you should know that all phenomena are without thought construction.
 “Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings  should practice the perfection of wisdom like that without thought construction. Practicing the perfection of wisdom without thought construction there is a full awakening to dharmas without thought construction.” 
This was the fifty-eighth chapter, “Exposition of the Absence of Thought Construction,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 59: Nonattachment
Then venerable Śāriputra said to venerable Subhūti, “Ah! Venerable Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings who are practicing this perfection of wisdom make a practice of something really worthwhile. Ah! The bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom make a practice of something really worthwhile.”
 Venerable Śāriputra having said this, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Ah! Venerable Śāriputra, the bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom make a practice of something that is not worthwhile! And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because the perfection of wisdom is not worthwhile, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not worthwhile. And why? Venerable Śāriputra, it is because bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom do not apprehend and do not see even something not worthwhile, so however could they apprehend something really worthwhile? Similarly, connect this with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not worthwhile, so however could they apprehend something really worthwhile?”
 Then it occurred to the gods living in the desire realm and living in the form realm to think, “It is right to bow down to those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family  who have produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, to those who practice this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught, and to those who practice that reality but still do not actualize the very limit of reality, the very limit of reality which, were they to have actualized it, would have them standing on the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. By the same token, it is right to bow down to those bodhisattva great beings who do not actualize these dharmas as being the same.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to those gods, “Gods! For those bodhisattva great beings it is not difficult to refrain from actualizing those dharmas as being the same, dharmas which, were they to have actualized them, would have left them standing on the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, but, gods, it is difficult for them to buckle on the armor of ‘we will place infinite, countless beings without measure in complete nirvāṇa,’ and still absolutely not apprehend those beings they have to discipline. Gods! Bodhisattva great beings practicing like that have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening with the thought, ‘I will discipline all beings,’ and that aspiration—‘I will discipline beings’—is the aspiration, ‘I will discipline space.’ And why? It is because they have to view beings as isolated because space is isolated, view beings as empty because space is empty, view beings as worthless because space is worthless, and view beings as in vain because space is in vain. Gods! In this way those bodhisattva great beings  buckling on armor for the sake of nonexistent beings are those who do what is difficult. Gods, someone with the thought to buckle on armor for the sake of beings wants to argue with space. Bodhisattva great beings have buckled on that armor but still do not apprehend those beings for whose sake they have buckled on the armor. And why? Because they view armor as isolated because beings are isolated. If the bodhisattva great beings’ minds are not cowed when this is taught, they are practicing the perfection of wisdom. 
 “And why? Because they view beings as isolated because form is isolated; beings as isolated because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are isolated; the perfection of wisdom as isolated because form is isolated; connect this in the same way with each, up to and the knowledge of all aspects as isolated because form is isolated. If bodhisattva great beings’ minds are not cowed, if they do not tense up, tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when this explanation of the isolation of all phenomena is being given, those bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom.”
 “Subhūti, why are bodhisattva great beings not cowed by the perfection of wisdom?” asked the Lord.
 “Lord,” replied Subhūti, “bodhisattva great beings are not cowed by the perfection of wisdom because it is nonexistent. Lord, bodhisattva great beings are not cowed by the perfection of wisdom because it is isolated, calm, and unproduced. It is because of that, Lord, that bodhisattva great beings  are not cowed by the perfection of wisdom. And why? Lord, it is because those who are cowed, or that on account of which they are cowed, or about which they are cowed—all those dharmas do not exist and are not apprehended. Lord, if bodhisattva great beings do not become depressed, do not become despondent, do not feel cowed, do not tense up, do not tremble, do not feel frightened, and do not become terrified when this explanation is being given, those bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom. And why? Lord, it is because those who are cowed, or that on account of which they are cowed, or about which they are cowed—all those dharmas do not exist and are not apprehended. Lord, the gods—those with the Indras, those with the Brahmās, and those with the Prajāpatis—will bow down to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that.” 
 Venerable Subhūti having responded like this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, not only should the gods—those with the Indras, those with the Brahmās, and those with the Prajāpatis as their leaders—bow down to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that, but the Śubhakṛtsna gods of surpassing color, the Bṛhatphala . . . , up to the Śuddhāvāsa classes of gods should also bow down to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that as well. 
 “Subhūti, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves  in infinite, countless world systems—those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas too watch over those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, having in mind, ‘This bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom, completing the perfection of concentration . . . ,’ connect this in the same way with each, up to ‘. . . completing the knowledge of all aspects.’ Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, the bodhisattva great beings whom the lord buddhas watch over, should be treated as candidates for buddhahood. 
 “If all the beings in world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, as many as there are, were to become wicked Māras, and if each of those wicked Māras were to magically create that many wicked Māras, they would be incapable of hindering those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, the Māras, the wicked ones, cannot break bodhisattva great beings endowed with two dharmas. Which two? They view all dharmas as emptiness and they do not give up on all beings. Endowed with those two dharmas, Subhūti, the Māras, the wicked ones, cannot break bodhisattva great beings.
 “There are a further two dharmas, Subhūti, endowed with which bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are not broken by the Māras, the wicked ones. Which two? They are true to their word and watched out for by the lord buddhas.  Endowed with those two dharmas, Subhūti, the Māras, the wicked ones, cannot break bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom. 
 “The gods will think that they should approach bodhisattva great beings practicing like that to attend on them, to question them and make inquires, and they convey their enthusiasm, saying, ‘Son of a good family, you are going to quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, so, son of a good family, you should dwell by dwelling in these, namely, by dwelling in emptiness, dwelling in signlessness, and dwelling in wishlessness. And why? Son of a good family, it is because if you dwell in those dwellings you will become the protector of beings without a protector, you will become the refuge of beings without a refuge, you will become the support of beings without a support, you will become the final ally of beings without a final ally, you will become the resting place of beings without a resting place, you will become the island of beings without an island, and you will become the sight of beings who have gone blind. And why? Because the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in infinite, countless world systems, lord buddhas surrounded by communities of monks, also teach the Dharma to the bodhisattva great beings dwelling in this dwelling of the perfection of wisdom, expressing delight in the form of proclamations of the name and the lineage of those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that, which is to say, those bodhisattva great beings endowed with the requirements  for the good qualities of the perfection of wisdom. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, I now express delight and teach the Dharma in the form of a proclamation of the name of the bodhisattva great being Ratnaketu; express delight and teach the Dharma in the form of a proclamation of the name of the bodhisattva great being Śikhin; and I also express delight and teach the Dharma in the form of proclamations of the names of those bodhisattva great beings living a celibate life, those bodhisattva great beings inseparable from the perfection of wisdom in the presence of the lord, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya. Subhūti, the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in the eastern direction, those lord buddhas also teach the Dharma, they too express delight and teach the Dharma by way of being delighted by those bodhisattva great beings living such a celibate life there. Similarly, the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in the south, west, and north, below and above, and the intermediate directions, those lord buddhas also teach the Dharma, they too express delight and teach the Dharma by way of being delighted by those bodhisattva great beings inseparable from the perfection of wisdom living a celibate life. Subhūti, the lord buddhas also express delight and teach the Dharma by way of being delighted by those bodhisattva great beings who, starting from the first production of the thought,  complete the awakening path, until they reach the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Subhūti, it is because those bodhisattva great beings who have thus set out to ensure that there will be no interruption to a buddha’s guiding principle are those who do what is difficult.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, do those lord buddhas teach the Dharma in the form of a proclamation of the names of, and by way of being delighted by, those bodhisattva great beings who turn back or those who do not turn back?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord replied to him, “Subhūti, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who are irreversible from awakening, and there are also those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who have not been prophesied—and those lord buddhas express delight and teach the Dharma to them by way of being delighted by them.”
 “Lord, who are they?” asked Subhūti.
 “Subhūti,” said the Lord, “those bodhisattva great beings who, when they practice a bodhisattva’s practice, practice by way of following the lord, the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya in training—they, Subhūti, are irreversible bodhisattva great beings. Those lord buddhas express of delight and teach the Dharma to them by way of being delighted by them.  Subhūti, those lord buddhas also express delight and teach the Dharma by way of being delighted by them to those bodhisattva great beings who, when they practice a bodhisattva’s practice, practice by way of following the bodhisattva Ratnaketu in training. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who believe all dharmas are not produced but still have not gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas, who believe all dharmas are ‘empty’ but still have not gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas, who believe all dharmas are ‘calm,’ who believe all dharmas are ‘free from greed,’ ‘in vain,’ ‘a fraud,’ and ‘pointless,’ but still have not gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas—the lord buddhas, Subhūti, express delight and by way of being delighted by them teach the Dharma to them. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings in regard to whom those lord buddhas express delight and teach the Dharma in the form of a proclamation of their names, teach the Dharma by way of being delighted by them, those bodhisattva great beings will shun the śrāvaka level and pratyekabuddha level, and their unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening will be prophesied. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, in regard to whom those lord buddhas express delight and teach the Dharma in the form of a proclamation of their names, those bodhisattva great beings will stand  in the irreversible state, and having stood there will reach the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who, having listened to the deep perfection of wisdom, are not unsure, not open to doubt, and not perplexed about whether it is exactly what the unsurpassed, perfectly complete buddha has said will again hear in detail about it later on from the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya and from those sons of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle. Those sons of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle will also have a belief in this perfection of wisdom, and with a belief in this deep perfection of wisdom will believe it is exactly what the Tathāgata has said and will stand in the irreversible state. 
 “Subhūti, given that there is such a great boon for bodhisattva great beings who even hear the perfection of wisdom, what need is there to mention those who believe in it, and believing it stand in suchness and practice it for suchness, and having stood in suchness and practiced it for suchness will reach the knowledge of all aspects?” 
 “Lord,” Subhūti then inquired, “given that no phenomenon is apprehended when they have stood in suchness and practiced for suchness, how will they stand in the knowledge of all aspects? Lord, given that no phenomenon called ‘a tathāgata’s magical creation’ is apprehended at all, who will stand in suchness, and who, having stood in suchness, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Who, having stood in suchness, will teach the Dharma?  Given that even suchness is not apprehended, what need is there to say more about someone who will stand in suchness; someone who, having stood in suchness, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and who, having stood in suchness, will teach the Dharma? It is impossible.” 
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, you have said, ‘Lord, given that no phenomenon called “a tathāgata’s magical creation” is apprehended at all, who will stand in suchness, and who, having stood in suchness, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Who, having stood in suchness, will teach the Dharma? Given that even suchness is not apprehended, what need is there to say more about someone who will stand in suchness; someone who, having stood in suchness, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and who, having stood in suchness, will teach the Dharma? It is impossible.’ Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! Subhūti, given that apart from suchness no other phenomenon is apprehended, who will stand in suchness; who, having stood in suchness, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and who, having stood in suchness, will teach the Dharma? Given that even suchness is not apprehended, what need is there to say more about someone who will stand in suchness; connect this in the same way with each, up to who, having stood in suchness, will teach the Dharma? It is impossible. 
 “And why?  Subhūti, it is because whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, and the very limit of reality simply remain. Subhūti, there is nobody who stands in suchness, there is also no full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening having stood in suchness, and there is no teaching of the Dharma having stood in suchness either. And why? Because in suchness you cannot apprehend anyone who will stand in suchness; anyone who, having stood in suchness, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; or anyone who, having stood in suchness, will teach the Dharma. Thus, because even suchness cannot be apprehended, therefore production cannot be apprehended there, and there is no stopping, no remaining, and no changing into something else. Therefore, because production cannot be apprehended in that dharma, and there is no stopping, no lasting, and no changing into something else, who will stand there; who, having stood there, will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; and who, having stood there, will teach the Dharma?”
 Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to the Lord, “Lord, this perfection of wisdom is deep. Lord, those bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are those who do what is difficult. And why? Because there is nobody  who will stand in suchness, there is nothing that is full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and there is nothing that is the teaching of the Dharma, but still they do not become unsure, do not become open to doubt, and do not become perplexed by that.”
 Then venerable Subhūti said to Śatakratu, head of the gods, “Kauśika, you have said that bodhisattva great beings who do not become open to doubt, and do not become perplexed by the deep dharmas, are those who do what is difficult. Kauśika, all phenomena are emptiness, so who would doubt or become perplexed by that?”
 The elder Subhūti having said this, Śatakratu, head of the gods, replied to him, “Whatever the elder Subhūti teaches, all of it is a teaching that takes emptiness as its point of departure and does not get attached to anything. Just as when an arrow is shot into the sky, it does not get attached to anything, similarly, even though the elder Subhūti teaches the Dharma, it does not get attached to anything.” 
This was the fifty-ninth chapter, “Nonattachment,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 60: Entrusting
Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, asked the Lord, “Speaking like that and teaching like that, am I saying what the Lord has said, teaching the Dharma and perfectly giving expression to the Dharma in its totality?”
 “Kauśika,” replied the Lord, “speaking like that and teaching like that you are saying what the Lord has said, teaching the Dharma and giving expression to the Dharma in its totality.”
 Śatakratu said, “Lord, it is amazing how the elder Subhūti is confident in his readiness to speak about it  all with emptiness as the point of departure, is confident in his readiness to speak with signlessness and wishlessness as the point of departure, and is confident in his readiness to speak about the applications of mindfulness, up to awakening with that point of departure.”
 Śatakratu, head of the gods, having said this, the Lord said to him, “Kauśika, Subhūti, dwelling in emptiness, does not apprehend even the perfection of giving, so what need is there to say more about those who might practice the perfection of giving. Similarly, connect this with he does not apprehend even the perfection of wisdom, so what need is there to say more about those who might practice the perfection of wisdom; he does not apprehend even the applications of mindfulness, so what need is there to say more about those who might cultivate the applications of mindfulness; similarly, connect this with each, up to he does not apprehend even the path, so what need is there to say more about those who might cultivate the path. Similarly, connect this with he does not apprehend even the concentrations . . . , immeasurables . . . , deliverances . . . , meditative stabilizations . . . , or absorptions, so what need is there to say more about those who might cultivate the absorptions; he does not apprehend even the powers, so what need is there to say more about those who might cultivate the powers; he does not apprehend even the fearlessnesses, so what need is there to say more about those who might accomplish the fearlessnesses; he does not apprehend even the detailed and thorough knowledges, so what need is there to say more about those who might accomplish the detailed and thorough knowledges; he does not apprehend even great love, so what need is there to say more about those who might stand in great love; he does not apprehend even great compassion, so what need is there to say more about those  who might stand in great compassion; he does not apprehend even the distinct attributes of a buddha, so what need is there to say more about those who might accomplish the distinct attributes of a buddha; he does not apprehend even awakening, so what need is there to say more about those who might fully awaken to awakening; he does not apprehend even the knowledge of all aspects, so what need is there to say more about those who might reach the knowledge of all aspects; and he does not apprehend even the Tathāgata, so what need is there to say more about those who might become a tathāgata? He does not apprehend even nonproduction, so what need is there to say more about those who might directly realize nonproduction; he does not apprehend even the major marks, so what need is there to say more about those on whose bodies the major marks might appear; and he does not apprehend even the minor signs, so what need is there to say more about those on whose bodies the minor signs might appear. And why? Kauśika, it is because the monk Subhūti abides in the isolation of all dharmas. Kauśika, it is because the monk Subhūti dwells without apprehending anything, dwells in emptiness, dwells in signlessness, and dwells in wishlessness. 
 “Kauśika, the monk Subhūti’s dwelling is like that and yet, Kauśika, that dwelling of the monk Subhūti does not approach the bodhisattva great being’s dwelling in the perfection of wisdom even by a hundredth part; it does not approach it by a thousandth part, does not approach it by a hundred thousandth part, and does not approach it by a hundred thousandth one hundred millionth part—it does not approach it by any number, fraction, counting, example, or comparison. 
 “And why? Because, setting aside the dwelling of a tathāgata, those dwelling as bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  are highest, foremost, special, best, superb, sublime, unsurpassed, and unrivaled among those dwelling in the dwellings of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. Therefore, Kauśika, those who want to become the foremost of all beings should dwell in just this dwelling, namely, dwell in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “And why? Kauśika, it is because bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom pass beyond the śrāvaka level and the pratyekabuddha level, enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and, having completed all the buddhadharmas, reach the knowledge of all aspects. Having reached the knowledge of all aspects, they obtain the elimination of all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions.”
 Then the Trāyastriṃśa gods in that very retinue took up coral tree flowers and strewed them near, strewed them in front, and strewed them all around the Lord. Six thousand monks also got up from their seats, adjusted their upper robes so they hung down from one shoulder, knelt down with their right knees on the ground, cupped their palms together in a gesture of supplication specifically to the Lord, and bowed down toward him without closing their eyes. Through the power of the Buddha the palms of their hands cupped in the gesture of supplication were filled with coral tree flowers. They strewed the coral tree flowers near, strewed them in front, and strewed them all around  the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha. While strewing them near, strewing them in front, and strewing them all around him, they made this statement: “Lord, on account of this wholesome root may we dwell in this loftiest of dwellings that is not the dwelling of all the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.”
Then at that time the Lord, knowing the aspiration of those monks, smiled. And it is in the very nature of a lord buddha that at the time of the smile, from the opening of the lord’s mouth issue forth light rays of many colors, of a variety of colors, namely, blue, yellow, red, white, reddish brown, crystalline, and silver-like. Having spread through the great billionfold world system and lit it up, they retract back, circling around the lord three times and disappearing into the lord from the top of his head.
 Venerable Ānanda then got up from his seat, adjusted his upper robe so it hung down from one shoulder, knelt down with his right knee on the ground, cupped his palms together in a gesture of supplication specifically to the Lord, bowed forward to him, and said to the Lord, “Lord, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas do not give a smile without a cause, without a condition. So why did you smile? What is the cause, what is the condition?”
 Venerable Ānanda having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Ānanda, during the eon called Tārakopama these six thousand monks will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. All will become  a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha called Avakīrṇakusuma. Ānanda, those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas called Avakīrṇakusuma will have a comparable community of monks, will have a comparable buddhafield, and will have a comparable thousand-year lifespan too. Having gone forth from wherever they go forth, they will go forth to homelessness, and having gone forth to homelessness, wherever they dwell, there a rain of five-colored flowers will rain down. Therefore, Ānanda, bodhisattva great being who want to dwell in the loftiest dwelling should practice the perfection of wisdom, and bodhisattva great beings who want to dwell in the Tathāgata’s dwelling should practice the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Ānanda, as for any son of a good family or daughter of a good family practicing this deep perfection of wisdom, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family should have this unquestioned certainty: ‘I have thus died a human and taken birth here, or have died among the Tuṣita class of gods and taken birth here. I have heard this deep perfection of wisdom in detail from humans or heard this deep perfection of wisdom in detail from the Tuṣita class of gods.’ Ānanda, the tathāgatas have kept their eye on those bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom. Ānanda, any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who hears this deep perfection of wisdom and, having heard it, takes it up, bears it in mind, reads it aloud, masters it, properly  pays attention to it, and instructs persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle in this deep perfection of wisdom, Ānanda, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family should have this unquestioned certainty: ‘We have heard this deep perfection of wisdom from the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, and have taken it up, borne it in mind, read it aloud, and mastered it. We have produced wholesome roots sprung from those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.’ Ānanda, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family should know, ‘We have not produced wholesome roots sprung from śrāvakas, and we have not heard this deep perfection of wisdom from śrāvakas.’ Ānanda, any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who hears this deep perfection of wisdom, and takes it up, bears it in mind, reads it aloud, masters it, and understands it from the meaning, the Dharma, and the [Vi]naya, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family, Ānanda, should have this unquestioned certainty: ‘We have been face to face with the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.’ 
 “Ānanda, when any son of a good family or daughter of a good family hears an explanation of this deep perfection of wisdom and does not reject it, does not argue against it, and gains a serene confidence in it, Ānanda, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family should know, ‘I have served well the victors of the past and have been assisted by spiritual friends.’
 “Ānanda, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who has planted wholesome roots from  the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas does not falsify the state of a śrāvaka or the state of a pratyekabuddha or the state of a buddha, but still, Ānanda, as bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving, connect this in the same way with each, up to practicing the knowledge of all aspects should have understood those states well. Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving, connect this in the same way with each, up to practicing the knowledge of all aspects who have understood them well do not dwell in the state of a śrāvaka or the state of a pratyekabuddha. 
 “Therefore, Ānanda, I entrust this deep perfection of wisdom to you. Ānanda, of all the Dharma I have taught, with the exception of the perfection of wisdom, if you, having taken up and mastered all the Dharma I have taught, afterward let it go to waste, and afterward reject it, you will not, just on that account, be at fault as far as I am concerned. But, Ānanda, should you, having taken up this deep perfection of wisdom, afterward let even a single line of it go to waste you will, just on that account, be at fault as far as I am concerned. Ānanda, if you, having taken up this deep perfection of wisdom, afterward do not let it go to waste and do not throw it away, Ānanda, you will be faultless as far as I am concerned. 
 “So, Ānanda, I entrust this deep perfection of wisdom to you. One way or the other take it up, bear it in mind, read it aloud, master it, and always pay proper attention to it. Take it up well, bear it in mind well, with the letters, stems, and inflected words perfectly received and having fully grasped the excellent explanation. Ānanda, any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who  takes up this deep perfection of wisdom, bears it in mind, reads it aloud, masters it, and properly pays attention to it will have taken up the entire awakening of past, future, and present lord buddhas. Ānanda, any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up and assists with this deep perfection of wisdom will have assisted with the awakening of past, future, and present lord buddhas. 
 “Ānanda, any sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who want to respect, revere, honor, and worship me directly now with flowers, or incense, or garlands, or perfumes, or creams, or powders, or robes, or parasols, or flags, or banners, should all take up this deep perfection of wisdom, bear it in mind, read it aloud, and master it, and having taken it up, borne it in mind, read it aloud, and mastered it, they should respect, should revere, should honor, and should worship this deep perfection of wisdom with flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. Those who respect, revere, honor, and worship the perfection of wisdom also worship me as well, and they worship the past, future, and present lord buddhas too. Ānanda, any sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who foster feelings of veneration, liking, and faith when this deep perfection of wisdom is being explained foster feelings of veneration, liking, faith, and adoration  for past, future, and present lord buddhas too.
 “Ānanda, if you love me, if I am dear to you and you have not given up on me, then, Ānanda, love this deep perfection of wisdom, make it dear and do not give up on it. One way or the other you must not let even just a single line of this deep perfection of wisdom go to waste.
 “Ānanda, I have said much to you concerning the complete instructions for this deep perfection of wisdom, but in short, just as I am your teacher so too is this deep perfection of wisdom your teacher. Therefore, Ānanda, I deliver over to you this perfection of wisdom in an immeasurable delivery. Therefore, Ānanda, I declare to the world with its gods, humans, and asuras that those who have not given up the Buddha, who have not given up the Dharma, who have not given up the Saṅgha, and who have not given up the awakening of the past, future, and present lord buddhas should not give up this deep perfection of wisdom. This is my instruction. 
 “Ānanda, any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who takes up this deep perfection of wisdom, bears it in mind, reads it aloud, masters it, and pays proper attention to it; who perfectly reveals it to others in detail with one of many explanations; and who expounds, explains, gives an exposition on, makes known, advances, gives a commentary on, sorts out, and makes clear this deep perfection of wisdom, Ānanda, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family will quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and be near the knowledge of all aspects.  And why? Ānanda, it is because the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of the lord buddhas has come about from the perfection of wisdom. Ānanda, the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of those lord buddhas who were tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in times gone by has come about from this perfection of wisdom; Ānanda, the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of those lord buddhas who will be tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in times yet to come will come about from this perfection of wisdom; and, Ānanda, the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of those lord buddhas who are tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas presently standing in the eastern direction, in the south, west, and north, below and above, and the intermediate directions too, Ānanda, comes about from this perfection of wisdom as well. 
 “Therefore, Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings who want to awaken fully to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should train in these six perfections. And why? Ānanda, it is because these—namely, the six perfections—give birth to bodhisattva great beings. 
 “Ānanda, all those bodhisattva great beings who are training in the six perfections will go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Therefore, Ānanda, I deliver over these six perfections in a detailed description. And why? Ānanda, it is because this—namely,  the perfections treasure house—is the treasure house of the Dharma of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. It is an inexhaustible treasure house. Ānanda, those lord buddhas teaching the Dharma who are tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in the east, south, west, and north, below and above, and in the intermediate directions, they too, Ānanda, teach the Dharma from just this treasure house of the perfections. Ānanda, those lord buddhas who were tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in times gone by, they too, having trained in just these six perfections, fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; Ānanda, those lord buddhas who will be tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas in times yet to come, they too will train in just these six perfections, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and teach the Dharma. And, Ānanda, those śrāvakas of past, future, and present lord buddhas, as many as there are, they too, having trained in just this perfection of wisdom, have entered complete nirvāṇa, will enter complete nirvāṇa, and are entering complete nirvāṇa. 
 “Ānanda, were you to teach the Dharma that has to do with the śrāvaka level to persons in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, and were all the beings in a great billionfold world system to actualize the state of a worthy one through that teaching of the Dharma, Ānanda, you still would not have done the work to be done by my śrāvakas. But,  Ānanda, were you for bodhisattva great beings to throw light on just one line of Dharma associated with the perfection of wisdom, that would make you a śrāvaka pleasing to me, and you would have done the work to be done by a śrāvaka. 
 “Ānanda, what do you think, were all the beings, as many as there are, in a great billionfold world system to have simultaneously obtained human bodies and to have actualized the state of a worthy one through that earlier teaching of the Dharma, in regard to those bases of meritorious action arisen from giving, those bases of meritorious action arisen from morality, and those bases of meritorious action arisen from meditation of those worthy ones—would there be a lot of those bases of meritorious action?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” he said.
 “Ānanda,” he continued, “were anyone in the Śrāvaka Vehicle to teach the Dharma associated with the perfection of wisdom to a bodhisattva great being for even just one single day, they would create even more merit than that. Ānanda, let alone they would create more than that in one day, Ānanda, were anyone in the Śrāvaka Vehicle to teach the Dharma associated with the perfection of wisdom to a bodhisattva great being for even half a day; or let alone half a day, Ānanda, for even just a morning; or let alone just a morning, Ānanda, for down to even less than half an hour, or down to half a minute, or a few seconds, or just the time it takes to blink, they still would create even more merit than that, and surpass the wholesome root of all those in the Śrāvaka Vehicle and Pratyekabuddha Vehicle. 
 “Ānanda, were bodhisattva great beings to teach the Dharma associated with the perfection of wisdom to persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle for even just one single day, or half a day, or a morning, or down to less than half an hour, or down to half a minute, or a few seconds, or just the time it takes to blink, Ānanda, those bodhisattva great beings would surpass the wholesome roots of all those persons in the Śrāvaka Vehicle and Pratyekabuddha Vehicle. And why? It is because of wanting personally to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and to inspire and teach others to take it up, to motivate them, and to cause them to enter into, and establish them in, unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Thus, Ānanda, because bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections, practicing the applications of mindfulness, practicing . . . , up to the knowledge of path aspects grow from those wholesome roots, it is impossible and there is no chance they will be lacking in what is necessary for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. It is impossible.”
 When this exposition of the perfection of wisdom was being given, the Lord enacted such an enactment of miraculous power in front of the four retinues, gods, humans, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas that those retinues, because of such an enactment of miraculous power, all beheld the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya teaching the Dharma to bodhisattva great beings, with a retinue like a great sea without a ripple, surrounded by a community of monks, at the head of a community of monks,  all worthy ones with outflows dried up, without afflictions, fully controlled, quite freed in their hearts, well freed and wise, thoroughbreds, great bull elephants, with their work done, their task accomplished, with their burden laid down, with their own goal accomplished, with the fetters that bound them to existence broken, and with their hearts well freed by right understanding, in perfect control of their whole mind. 
 Then the Lord drew back that miraculous power, and having drawn back that miraculous power, all the four retinues, the persons in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, the persons in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and so on no longer saw the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya, and no longer saw the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya’s buddhafield. The buddha and so on, and those communities of monks, no longer appeared within the range of their eye sense-power. And why? The Tathāgata had drawn back the enactment of miraculous power. That is why they no longer saw.
 Then the Lord said to venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, do you see that buddhafield of the tathāgata Akṣobhya, that tathāgata Akṣobhya himself, that community of monks, and that community of bodhisattvas?”
 “Lord,” he replied, “the buddhafield of the tathāgata Akṣobhya, that tathāgata Akṣobhya himself, that community of monks, and that community of bodhisattvas are not within the field of vision.” 
 “Similarly, Ānanda,” he replied, “all dharmas are not within the field of vision. A dharma does not appear to a dharma. A dharma does not see a dharma. Just as the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Akṣobhya, those śrāvakas, those persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle, and that buddhafield are not within the field of vision, similarly, Ānanda, all dharmas are not within the field of vision either. A dharma does not see a dharma. A dharma does not know all dharmas, because all dharmas are without knowing, without seeing, and incapable of doing anything. And why? Ānanda, it is because all dharmas are without movement and ungraspable based on the fact that they have no essential nature; being without movement and ungraspable, Ānanda, all dharmas are inconceivable, and, Ānanda, like a person conjured up by magic, all dharmas are without experience. 
 “Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that are practicing the perfection of wisdom and do not settle down on any dharma at all. Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings training like that train in the perfection of wisdom, and, Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings who want to reach all the perfections should train in the perfection of wisdom too. Such a training is most excellent, foremost, best, superb, sublime, unsurpassed, and unrivaled, for the benefit of the whole world, for the happiness of the whole world, a protector of beings without a protector, endorsed by the buddhas and extolled by the buddhas. While remaining in it, even were the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly  complete buddhas to raise up this great billionfold world system with their right hand and place it down again it would not occur to those beings that this great billionfold world system had been raised up or placed down. And why? Ānanda, it is because, having trained in this perfection of wisdom, an insight has arisen in the lord buddhas into knowledge free from attachment to past, future, and present dharmas. Ānanda, of all trainings that exist, as many as there are, this perfection of wisdom training is the highest, most excellent, foremost, best, superb, sublime, unsurpassed, and unrivaled. 
 “Ānanda, to think that you can get the measure or limit of the perfection of wisdom is simply to think that you can get the measure or limit of space. And why? Ānanda, it is because the perfection of wisdom is immeasurable. Ānanda, I do not speak about the measure of the perfection of wisdom. You can get the measure of a collection of letters, a collection of stems, and a collection of inflected words, but you cannot get the measure of the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Ānanda asked him, “Why is it that the perfection of wisdom is without measure and cannot be given a size?”
 “Ānanda,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom is immeasurable because it is inexhaustible. Ānanda, the perfection of wisdom is immeasurable because it is isolated. Ānanda, those tathāgatas,  worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas who appeared in times gone by were generated from just this perfection of wisdom, but the perfection of wisdom is still not exhausted. Ānanda, those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas who will come about in times yet to come will be generated from just this perfection of wisdom, but the perfection of wisdom will still not be exhausted. And those present tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas presently dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in the ten directions—those lord buddhas too are generated from just this perfection of wisdom, but the perfection of wisdom still has not been exhausted, will not be exhausted, and is not exhausted. And why? Ānanda, it is because accepting that the perfection of wisdom can be exhausted is simply to accept that space can be exhausted, but the perfection of wisdom has not been exhausted, will not be exhausted, and is not exhausted. Connect this in the same way with the perfection of concentration, up to the perfection of giving has not been exhausted, will not be exhausted, and is not exhausted, and connect this in the same way with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects has not been exhausted, will not be exhausted, and is not exhausted, because those dharmas have no production, and dharmas that have no production have never come to an end.”
 Thereupon the Lord extended his tongue and, having covered the entire circle of his face with his tongue, said to venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, what do you think, would one with such a tongue speak untruthfully, speak falsely?”
 “No, Lord; no,  Sugata,” said Ānanda.
 “So then, Ānanda,” continued the Lord, “reveal this perfection of wisdom to the four retinues in detail. Teach it, establish it, settle it, sort it out, make it clear, and illuminate it. Ānanda, all the dharmas in which persons in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and in the Bodhisattva Vehicle should train are revealed in detail in just this deep perfection of wisdom, and if they train in them as they have been taught they will each stand at their own level. Ānanda, this deep perfection of wisdom is the entrance into all letters, and the entrance into all for which there are no letters. Ānanda, this deep perfection of wisdom is the gateway to all the dhāraṇīs—the dhāraṇī gateways in which bodhisattva great beings should train. Bodhisattva great beings who take up those dhāraṇīs obtain all the types of confidence giving a readiness to speak, and the detailed and thorough knowledges. 
 “Ānanda, I have taught that this deep perfection of wisdom is the inexhaustible treasure house of the good Dharma of the past, future, and present lord buddhas. Therefore, Ānanda, you should believe and know that whoever will take up, bear in mind, read aloud, and master this deep perfection of wisdom will have taken up the awakening of the past, future, and present lord buddhas. Ānanda, I have taught that this deep perfection of wisdom is the dhāraṇī. If you take up this perfection of wisdom dhāraṇī you will take possession of all dharmas.” 
This was the sixtieth chapter, “Entrusting,”  of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 61: Inexhaustible
Then it occurred to venerable Subhūti to think, “Ah! This awakening of the tathāgatas is deep, so without a doubt I am going to have to question the Tathāgata.” Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, is this perfection of wisdom not exhausted?”
“Subhūti,” he replied, “because space is inexhaustible the perfection of wisdom is not exhausted.”
“Lord, how are bodhisattva great beings to accomplish the perfection of wisdom?” he asked.
“Subhūti,” he replied, “because form is inexhaustible they will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are inexhaustible they will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, because the perfection of giving is inexhaustible they will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Connect this in the same way with each, up to Subhūti, because the knowledge of all aspects is inexhaustible they will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. 
“Through form and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through feeling and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through perception and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through volitional factors and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish  the perfection of wisdom. Through consciousness and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through the aggregates and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Connect this in the same way with through the constituents and space being inexhaustible, and through the sense fields and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. 
“Through dependent origination and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through ignorance and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through volitional factors and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through consciousness and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through name and form and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through the six sense fields and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through contact and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through feeling and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva  great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through craving and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through appropriation and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through existence and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through birth and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom. Through old age, death, pain, lamentation, suffering, depression, and grief and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings will accomplish the perfection of wisdom.
“Subhūti, this is how bodhisattva great beings should accomplish the perfection of wisdom, and this, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ insight into dependent origination and insight into avoiding a beginning and an end. Such insight into dependent origination is the distinctive attribute of bodhisattva great beings seated at the site of awakening, and with such insight into dependent origination they will reach the knowledge of all aspects. Subhūti, any bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom by way of this space-like inexhaustible accomplishment have insight into dependent origination and will not stand on the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. They will stand  in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. When any son of a good family or daughter of a good family in the Bodhisattva Vehicle turns back, they turn back on account of not having resorted to paying attention to the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, they do not understand how bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom by way of this space-like inexhaustible accomplishment get insight into dependent origination and accomplishment. Subhūti, those persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle who will turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening will turn back on account of not having resorted to this skill in means. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings who are irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening thanks to this perfection of wisdom because of skillful means. Therefore, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should get insight into dependent origination and accomplishment through the space-like inexhaustible accomplishment. 
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings with such insight into dependent origination do not see any causeless phenomenon being produced at all, do not view any ceasing permanent phenomenon at all, do not view any phenomenon as a self at all, and do not view any phenomenon at all as a being, a living being, a creature, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, one who lives, a person, one who does, one who makes someone else do, a motivator, one who motivates, one who feels, one who makes someone else feel, one who knows, one who sees, or as permanent, impermanent, suffering,  happiness, self, selfless, calm, or not calm. Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should have insight into dependent origination. Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom they do not view form as permanent or impermanent, as happiness or suffering, as self or no self, or as calm or not calm. Connect this in the same way with each, up to they do not view the knowledge of all aspects as permanent or impermanent, as happiness or suffering, as self or no self, or as calm or not calm. 
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, by practicing the perfection of wisdom they do not at that time see the perfection of wisdom, and they do not see a phenomenon with which they would see the perfection of wisdom, and so too with the perfection of concentration, up to the perfection of giving. Connect this in the same way with each, up to they do not see awakening, and they do not see a phenomenon with which they would see awakening. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should thus practice the perfection of wisdom without apprehending any phenomena. 
“Subhūti, when a bodhisattva great being practices the perfection of wisdom like this without apprehending any phenomena, at that time, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one gets a sharp stab of pain.  For example, Subhūti, just as a human being whose mother and father die gets a sharp stab of pain, gets a huge sharp stab of pain, so too, Subhūti, Māra the wicked one gets a sharp stab of pain when a bodhisattva great being practices the perfection of wisdom without apprehending all phenomena.” 
The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, will one single wicked Māra get a sharp stab of pain when a bodhisattva great being practices the perfection of wisdom without apprehending all dharmas, or will all the wicked Māras standing in a great billionfold world system get a sharp stab of pain and not sit easily on their own seats?” 
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “when a bodhisattva great being is inseparable from the dwelling that is the perfection of wisdom, all the wicked Māras standing in a great billionfold world system will get an excruciatingly sharp stab of pain and not sit easily on their own seats. The world with its gods, humans, and asuras will not find any opportunity to get hold of and hurt a bodhisattva great being in a life like that. 
“Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should dwell in the dwelling that is this perfection of wisdom. When bodhisattva great beings are dwelling in this dwelling that is this perfection of wisdom, the cultivation of the perfection of giving reaches completion. Connect this in the same way with each, up to the cultivation of the perfection of concentration reaches completion.  When bodhisattva great beings are practicing this perfection of wisdom, the cultivation of all the perfections reaches completion.”
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how does the cultivation of the perfection of giving reach completion in bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom? How does the cultivation of the perfection of morality reach completion . . . , and so too, up to how does the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom reach completion?”
Venerable Subhūti having inquired about this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings giving a gift give the gift while dedicating it to the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ cultivation of the perfection of giving reaches completion. 
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings guarding morality guard morality while dedicating it to the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ cultivation of the perfection of morality reaches completion. 
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings making a practice of patience cultivate patience while dedicating it to the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ cultivation of the perfection of patience reaches completion. 
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings make an effort at perseverance, how does the cultivation of the perfection of perseverance reach completion? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings making an effort  at perseverance do so while dedicating it to the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ cultivation of the perfection of perseverance reaches completion. 
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings becoming absorbed in concentration become absorbed in concentration while dedicating it to the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ cultivation of those perfections of concentration reaches completion. 
“Subhūti, how does the bodhisattva great beings’ cultivation of the perfection of wisdom reach completion? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings cultivating the perfection of wisdom cultivate wisdom while dedicating those perfections of wisdom to the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ cultivation of the perfection of wisdom reaches completion.” 
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of morality?”
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here bodhisattva great beings giving a gift and dedicating it to the knowledge of all aspects attend on all beings with kindly physical action, attend on all beings with kindly verbal action, and with kindly mental action. When they do so, the bodhisattva great beings incorporate the perfection of morality.” 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of patience?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here, when bodhisattva great beings give a gift, even if the recipients criticize or humiliate or refuse to associate with and swear at them, they do not bear them any malice. In that case, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of patience.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of perseverance?” he asked.
“Subhūti,” he replied, “when bodhisattva great beings give a gift and those recipients criticize or humiliate or refuse to associate with and swear at them, if, even while being criticized or humiliated or sworn at they keep on being generous, keep on giving things away, willing themselves to persevere physically and mentally with the thought, ‘Mine is simply the giving of gifts, mine is not the withholding of them,’ in that case, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of perseverance.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of concentration?” he asked.
“Subhūti,” he replied, “here bodhisattva great beings giving a gift, when giving that gift away dedicate it to the knowledge of all aspects. They do not dedicate it in their minds to the śrāvaka level  or the pratyekabuddha level, but rather focus their thought only on the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of concentration.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of wisdom?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here while bodhisattva great being are giving a gift, giving that gift away and dedicating it to the knowledge of all aspects, they continually bring to mind the fact that the giving is like an illusion and they do not see that giving as helping or harming any being at all. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of wisdom.”
This was the sixty-first chapter, “Inexhaustible,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 62: Leaping Above Absorption
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of giving?” 
Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord replied to him, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality do not grasp the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level as absolute on account of any rule, be it a rule to do with body or speech or mind. Standing in the perfection of morality they do not kill beings. They do not steal, do not engage in illicit sex because of lust, do not lie,  do not insult, do not engage in backbiting, do not babble nonsense, do not covet, do not bear malice, and do not have a wrong view. Standing in that perfection of morality, whatever the gift they give, be it food to those who are begging for food, something to drink to those who want something to drink, incense to those who want incense, transport to those who want transport, clothes to those who want clothes, flower garlands to those who want flower garlands, creams to those who want creams, beds to those who want beds, seats to those who want seats, a lamp to those who want a lamp, prerequisites for those who need the prerequisites,up to whatever human requirements are appropriate, they make that gift into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They make a dedication in such a way that it is not a dedication to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of giving.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of patience?”
“Subhūti, here if every being were to chop and carry off every major or minor part of the body of bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality, it would not disturb even a single production of their thought of awakening. They would not nurse pent-up anger and would not bear malice. Rather, it would occur to them to think, ‘I have found every being chopping and carrying off the major or minor parts of my body  like that as something very useful.’ In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of patience.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of perseverance?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings thinking, ‘I will free every being from saṃsāra and establish them in the realm of immortality,’ do not slacken off from physical and mental perseverance. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of perseverance.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of concentration?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings, having become absorbed in and abiding in the first concentration, and having become absorbed in and abiding in the second, third, and fourth concentration, do not hold the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level as a support, but rather think, ‘Absorbed in this perfection of meditative stabilization I will free every being from saṃsāra.’ In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of concentration.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great being standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of wisdom?” 
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality do not see any phenomenon other than all those that do not pass beyond suchness. They do not see any phenomenon as compounded, nor do they see it as uncompounded. They do not see an existent thing as compounded, nor do they see a nonexistent thing as uncompounded, nor do they see a causal sign that is compounded, nor do they see the absence of a causal sign that is uncompounded, nor do they see any phenomenon as there or not there. With that perfection of wisdom and skillful means they do not fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality incorporate the perfection of wisdom.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of giving?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti, here, starting from their first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, were all beings to criticize, humiliate, and chop off the major or minor parts of the body of bodhisattva great beings, it would occur to those bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience to think, ‘Mine is simply the giving of gifts, mine is not the withholding of them.’ They give food to those who want food, something to drink to those who want something to drink, and similarly, up to they give whatever human requirements are appropriate, and they make that gift into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. One way or the other they make the dedication in such a way that the dedication operates without the threefold intellectual apprehension of  someone who is dedicating, something being dedicated, or something to which the dedication is made. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of giving.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of morality?” asked Subhūti.
“Subhūti, here, starting from their first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, bodhisattva great beings do not deprive any being of its life. They do not steal, and similarly, up to they do not have a wrong view. Also, their minds are not occupied with the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level. They make those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and one way or the other they make the dedication in such a way that the dedication operates without the threefold intellectual apprehension . . . , up to of something to which the dedication is made. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of morality.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of perseverance?” 
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience will themselves to persevere, thinking, ‘I would go a single yojana, go a hundred yojanas, go a thousand yojanas, go to a single world system, or go to a hundred thousand one hundred million world systems  if I could make even just one single being train in the points of training, if I could establish them in the result of stream enterer, up to the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or if I could establish them in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ They make those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of perseverance.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of concentration?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience are detached from sense objects and detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas. Connect this in the same way with each, up to they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the fourth concentration. They dedicate whatever mind and mental factor dharmas furnished with the wholesome that they have produced to the knowledge of all aspects, and at that time they make the dedication in such a way that they do not apprehend the concentrations or the branches of the concentrations. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of concentration.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of wisdom?”
“Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings are standing in the perfection of patience  they dwell as those who view the dharmas in their isolated aspect, or calm aspect, or extinct aspect, but they do not actualize that true nature of dharmas up until they are seated at the site of awakening. Having sat down there they reach the knowledge of all aspects, and arising from there they turn the wheel of the Dharma. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of patience incorporate the perfection of wisdom, but incorporate it in such a way that they do not take up and do not reject anything at all.” 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of giving?” 
“Subhūti, here, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance do not slacken off from physical and mental perseverance. They think, ‘Mine is the full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, mine is not not fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ and they go one yojana, or a hundred yojanas, or a thousand yojanas, or to a single world system, or to one hundred million world systems, or to a hundred thousand one hundred million world systems for the sake of beings, keeping on in the perfection of perseverance even if it is just to establish one single being in awakening. If they do not find a bodhisattva-vehicle person, still they establish a śrāvaka-vehicle person in the state of a śrāvaka and they establish a pratyekabuddha-vehicle person in the state of a pratyekabuddha. At the very least they establish just one being  in the path of the ten wholesome actions. They satisfy beings with the gift of Dharma and material gifts, but they do not dedicate those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. Rather they make those gifts into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of giving.” 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of morality?”
“Subhūti, here, starting from their first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance personally stop killing, inspire others to stop killing, speak in praise of stopping killing, and speak in praise of others stopping killing as well, welcoming it. Connect this is in the same way with each, up to they personally stop wrong view, inspire others to stop wrong view, speak in praise of stopping wrong view, and speak in praise of others stopping wrong view as well, welcoming it. With that morality they do not yearn for the desire realm and they do not yearn for the form realm or the formless realm. They do not yearn for the śrāvaka level and they do not yearn for the pratyekabuddha level. Rather, they make those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,  and one way or the other they make the dedication in such a way that the dedication occurs without the threefold intellectual apprehension of someone who is dedicating, something being dedicated, and something to which the dedication is made. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of morality.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of patience?”
“Subhūti, here, starting from their first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, if those in human form, up to in nonhuman form have disturbed the minds of bodhisattva great beings, or have chopped and carried off the major or minor parts of their bodies, still it does not occur to those bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance to think, ‘They are chopping something off me, or cutting me into pieces, or depriving me of something.’ Rather, it occurs to them to think, ‘Those who have come here and chopped and carried off the major or minor parts of my body are exactly those for whose sake I have taken care of my body, so I have found something very useful here.’ They have paid attention excellently to the basic nature of the true nature of dharmas. They do not dedicate those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, but rather, having made them into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of patience.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva  great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of concentration?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment; up to perfectly accomplish and dwell in the fourth concentration, in love, up to equanimity, up to in the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption. But they do not appropriate the maturations of those concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions; rather, they are born in them to work for the welfare of all beings, and with the six perfections—the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom—they bring those beings to maturity, passing on from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to attend on the lord buddhas and plant wholesome roots. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of concentration.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of wisdom?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance  do not view the perfection of giving as a material reality, as a real thing, or as a causal sign, up to they do not view the perfection of concentration as a material reality, as a real thing, or as a causal sign. Connect this is in the same way with each, up to they do not view the applications of mindfulness, up to the knowledge of all aspects as a material reality, as a real thing, or as a causal sign. They do not view all dharmas as a material reality, and they do not view them as a real thing, or as a causal sign. They do not make their home in any dharma. They live up to their words. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of perseverance incorporate the perfection of wisdom.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of giving?”
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration.Connect this is in the same way with each, up to they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption. Standing in the perfection of concentration they give the gift of material possessions and the gift of Dharma to those beings, without mental distraction. They personally give the gift of material possessions and the gift of Dharma. They inspire others to give the gift of material possessions and the gift of Dharma, speak in praise of giving the gift of material possessions and the gift of Dharma,  and speak in praise of others giving the gift of material possessions and the gift of Dharma as well, welcoming it. They do not dedicate those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. Rather, having made them into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of giving.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of morality?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration do not produce a thought associated with greed, do not produce a thought associated with hatred or one associated with confusion, and do not produce a thought associated with violence. Rather, they dwell with attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects. They do not dedicate those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. Rather, having made them into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of morality.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of patience?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration  analytically understand form to be like a mass of foam, understand feeling to be like a water bubble, understand perception to be like a mirage, understand volitional factors to be like a plantain tree, and analytically understand consciousness to be like something conjured up by magic. When they analytically understand the five aggregates to be like that, the perception that they are worthless becomes available. With such an analytical understanding, even when a major or minor part of their body is chopped off it occurs to them to think, ‘Who is chopping this off? Whose feeling is it? Whose perception is it? Whose volitional factors are they? Whose consciousness is it?’ With such an analytical understanding it also occurs to them to think, when abusive things have been done, ‘In whom does malice arise when abused and humiliated, and who is abusing and humiliating here?’ In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of patience.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of perseverance?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration. Connect this is in the same way with each, up to perfectly accomplish and dwell in the fourth concentration. Without apprehending the concentrations or the branches of the concentrations and with a mind in meditative equipoise like that, they experience the performance of miraculous power in its various aspects (supply the details here); hear human and divine sounds with the divine ear constituent; with their minds know the thought processes of other beings, other persons . . . ; connect this is in the same way with each, up to know an unsurpassed thought for what it is,  an unsurpassed thought; recollect past lives in their various aspects (also supply the details here); up to and see with their purified divine eyes that transcend the human how beings fare according to the karma they have accumulated. Standing in those five clairvoyances they pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to attend on the lord buddhas, and in order to plant wholesome roots, bring beings to maturity, and purify a buddhafield. They do not dedicate those wholesome roots to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. Rather, having made them into something shared in common by all beings, they dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of perseverance.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of wisdom?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration do not apprehend form; do not apprehend feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; do not apprehend the perfection of giving, do not apprehend the perfection of morality, do not apprehend the perfection of patience, do not apprehend the perfection of perseverance, do not apprehend the perfection of concentration, and do not apprehend the perfection of wisdom; do not apprehend the applications of mindfulness, do not apprehend the right efforts, connect this in the same way with each, up to and do not apprehend the knowledge of all aspects. They do not apprehend the compounded element and do not apprehend the uncompounded element. Since they do not apprehend anything, they do not occasion anything, and since they do not occasion anything, they do not make anything arise and do not make anything stop. And why? Subhūti, it is because whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, this true dharmic nature of dharmas simply remains, this establishment of dharmas simply remains, this dharma-constituent simply remains, so with regard to it there is no arising and no stopping. They stand with undistracted minds inseparable from attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of concentration incorporate the perfection of wisdom.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of giving?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom view all phenomena as empty.” 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings view all phenomena as empty?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend inner emptiness as ‘inner emptiness,’ do not apprehend outer emptiness as ‘outer emptiness,’ do not apprehend inner and outer emptiness as ‘inner and outer emptiness,’ connect this in the same way with do not apprehend the emptiness of emptiness . . . , up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature as  ‘the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.’ Having stood in those fourteen emptinesses, bodhisattva great beings do not apprehend ‘form is empty’ or ‘is not empty,’ do not apprehend ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ or ‘consciousness is empty’ or ‘is not empty’; do not apprehend ‘the applications of mindfulness . . . , the right efforts . . . ,’ connect this in the same way with each, up to ‘awakening is empty’ or ‘is not empty’; do not apprehend ‘the compounded element . . .’ or ‘the uncompounded element is empty’ or ‘is not empty.’ Those bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom give away gifts. They give the gifts of food, drink, clothes, transport, beds, seats, up to whatever human requirements are appropriate, but they view those gifts as empty, and view the giver and the ones to whom the gifts are given as empty as well, so there is no opportunity for a miserly thought or a stingy thought. And why? Because starting from their first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, those bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom do not have all those thought constructions. Just as a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha who has fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening does not have a miserly thought or a stingy thought, similarly bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom do not have a miserly thought or a stingy thought either, so just this—namely, the perfection of wisdom—  is the teacher of bodhisattva great beings. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of giving.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of morality?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom do not provide an opportunity for śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha thoughts. And why? Because they do not even apprehend a śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level, and do not apprehend the thought that dedicates to the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level. 
“Starting from their first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, they generate the intention to stop the taking of life. They personally stop killing, speak in praise of stopping killing, inspire others to stop killing, and speak in praise of others stopping killing as well, welcoming it. They generate the intention that they personally will stop . . . , up to wrong view. They stop wrong view, inspire others to stop wrong view, speak in praise of stopping wrong view, and speak in praise of others stopping wrong view as well, welcoming it. They do not grasp any dharma as an absolute, even the state of a worthy one, the state of a pratyekabuddha, or the state of a buddha, let alone anything other than those. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom incorporate  the perfection of morality.”
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of patience?”
“Subhūti, here patience arises in bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom in a natural order. It occurs to them to think, ‘Here no dharma at all is produced or ceases, or is born or dies, or is abused, or humiliated, or chopped, or cut, or struck, or obstructed.’ From the first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, even if all beings were to come up to them and abuse or humiliate, or strike, chop, or pierce them with a stone, a stick, a weapon, or a tool used as a weapon, still it would occur to them to think, ‘Ah! No dharma at all that is being abused, or humiliated, or chopped, or cut to pieces, or struck is apprehended in the true dharmic nature of dharmas.’ In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of patience.”
“Lord, how do a bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of perseverance?”
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom with skillful means stand on the legs of miraculous powers and work at physical and mental perseverance. They go to one world system, go to a hundred world systems, go to a hundred thousand one hundred million billion world systems and teach the Dharma to beings. They establish them in the perfection of giving; connect this in the same way with each, up to they establish them in the perfection of wisdom; they establish them in the dharmas on the side of awakening; they establish them in the result of stream enterer; connect this in the same way with each, up to they establish them in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; and they establish them in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They establish them such that one way or the other they do not establish them in the compounded element and do not establish them in the uncompounded element. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of perseverance.” 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of concentration?”
 “Subhūti, with the exception of the meditative stabilization of a tathāgata, here bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom become absorbed in and emerge from all the śrāvaka meditative stabilizations or pratyekabuddha meditative stabilizations or any other meditative stabilizations, as many as there may be. Standing in those meditative stabilizations they become absorbed in and emerge from the eight deliverances in conforming order and nonconforming order. What are the eight? With form they see form. This is the first deliverance. With the perception of no form inside they see form outside. This is the second deliverance. Having directly experienced the pleasant deliverance with the body, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in it. This is the third deliverance. Totally transcending perceptions of form, setting to rest perceptions of obstruction, not paying attention  to perceptions of difference, in endless space they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless space. This is the fourth deliverance. Totally transcending the station of endless space, in endless consciousness they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless consciousness. This is the fifth deliverance. Totally transcending the station of endless consciousness, in nothing-at-all they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of nothing-at-all. This is the sixth deliverance. Totally transcending the station of nothing-at-all, in neither perception nor nonperception they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. This is the seventh deliverance. Totally transcending the station of neither perception nor nonperception, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the cessation of perception and feeling. This is the eighth deliverance. They become absorbed in and emerge from these eight deliverances in conforming order and nonconforming order.
“They also become absorbed in and emerge from the nine serial absorptions in conforming order and nonconforming order. What are the nine? Detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment. Connect this in the same way with each, up to they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the fourth concentration, and totally transcending the station of neither perception nor nonperception, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the cessation of perception and feeling. They become absorbed in and emerge from those nine serial absorptions  in conforming order and nonconforming order. 
 “Having thus made a classification of those eight deliverances and nine attainments of successive stations, they become absorbed in the siṃha­vijṛmbhita meditative stabilization. And what, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ siṃha­vijṛmbhita meditative stabilization? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings detached from sense pleasures, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment, up to perfectly accomplish and dwell in the cessation of feeling and perception. Having emerged from the cessation absorption, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. Having emerged from the station of neither perception nor nonperception, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in . . . , up to the first concentration.
 “Having thus given a breakdown of the siṃha­vijṛmbhita meditative stabilization, they become absorbed in the viṣkandaka meditative stabilization. And what is the bodhisattva great beings’ viṣkandaka meditative stabilization? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings detached from sense pleasures, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment; and, having emerged from the first concentration . . . , connect this in the same way with each, up to they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. Having emerged from the station of neither perception nor nonperception, they become absorbed in the cessation of feelings and discriminations. Having emerged from the cessation absorption,  they become absorbed in the second concentration. Having emerged from the second concentration, they become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Having emerged from the cessation absorption, they become absorbed in the third concentration. Having emerged from the third concentration, they become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Having emerged from the cessation absorption, they become absorbed in the fourth concentration. Having emerged from the fourth concentration, they become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Having emerged from the cessation absorption, they become absorbed in the station of endless space absorption. Having emerged from the station of endless space absorption, they become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Having emerged from the cessation absorption, they become absorbed in the station of endless consciousness absorption. Having emerged from the station of endless consciousness absorption, they become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Having emerged from the cessation absorption, they become absorbed in the station of nothing-at-all absorption. Having emerged from the station of nothing-at-all absorption, they become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Having emerged from the cessation absorption, they become absorbed in the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption. Having emerged from the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption, they become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Having emerged from that, they fall into an uncollected state of mind,  and from that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the cessation absorption. Having emerged from the cessation absorption, they abide in an uncollected state of mind. From that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption. Having emerged from the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption, they abide in an uncollected state of mind. From that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the station of nothing-at-all absorption. Having emerged from the station of nothing-at-all absorption, they abide in an uncollected state of mind. From that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the station of endless consciousness absorption. Having emerged from the station of endless consciousness absorption, they fall into an uncollected state of mind. From that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the station of endless space absorption. Having emerged from the station of endless space absorption, they fall into an uncollected state of mind. From that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the fourth concentration. Having emerged from the fourth concentration, they abide in an uncollected state of mind. From that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the third concentration. Having emerged from the third concentration, they abide in an uncollected state of mind. From that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the second concentration. Having emerged from the second concentration, they abide in an uncollected state of mind. From that uncollected state of mind, they become absorbed in the first concentration.  Having emerged from the first concentration, they abide in an uncollected state of mind. 
“Having stood in this viṣkandaka meditative stabilization, they reach the sameness of all dharmas. In that way, Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom incorporate the perfection of concentration.” 
This was the sixty-second chapter, “Leaping Above Absorption,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 63: Many Inquiries About the Two Dharmas
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how long a time has it been since bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means set out?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, it is a countless one hundred million billion eons since the bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means set out.” 
 “Lord, how many lord buddhas have the bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means attended on?”
 “Subhūti, you should know that the bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means have attended on as many lord buddhas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River.” 
“Lord, how large is the wholesome root the bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means have planted?”
 “Subhūti, starting from the first  production of the thought, there is no perfection of giving the bodhisattva great beings have not completed. There is no perfection of morality, there is no perfection of patience, there is no perfection of perseverance, and there is no perfection of concentration they have not completed. There is no perfection of wisdom the bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means have not completed.”
“Lord, those bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means are totally amazing!”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is a countless one hundred million billion eons since those bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means have set out. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, the circle of the sun and the moon illuminate the four continents, moving in harmony with and revolving in harmony around the four continents. Similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom does its work through the five perfections, operating in harmony with and revolving in harmony around the five perfections. When the five perfections are not separated from the perfection of wisdom, they get the name perfection. Were the five perfections to become separated from the perfection of wisdom, they would not get the name perfection.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, were a wheel-turning emperor to be separated from the seven precious stones, he would not get the name wheel-turning emperor. Similarly, Subhūti, were the five perfections to become separated from the perfection of wisdom, they would not get the name perfection.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, it is easy for scoundrels  to violate women who have no husbands. Similarly, Subhūti, it is easy for Māra and the Māra class of gods to overpower the five perfections when they are separated from the perfection of wisdom. When the five perfections are not separated from the perfection of wisdom, Māra and the Māra class of gods do not overpower them, but when the five perfections are separated from the perfection of wisdom, Māra and the Māra class of gods try to do so. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, it is hard for a hostile king, or an opponent, or an enemy to overpower in the thick of battle a person who heads into battle having buckled on a complete set of armor. Similarly, Subhūti, it is hard for Māra, or the Māra class of gods, or persons with a pride in being superior, up to vulgar bodhisattvas to overpower the five perfections when they are not separated from the perfection of wisdom. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, local rulers harmonize with a wheel-turning emperor and every morning and evening go in order to attend on him. Similarly, Subhūti, when the five perfections are assisted by the perfection of wisdom, they proceed in harmony specifically to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, streams, as many as there are, flow down specifically into the Gaṅgā River and together they flow down to the ocean. Similarly, Subhūti, when the five perfections are assisted by the perfection of wisdom, they proceed in harmony specifically to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, a person’s right hand does all the work.  Subhūti, view the perfection of wisdom like that, and view the five perfections as being like the left hand. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, once the water in streams and the water in rivers have flowed into the ocean, they become of one taste. Similarly, Subhūti, once the five perfections assisted by the perfection of wisdom have entered in harmony specifically into the knowledge of all aspects, they get the name perfection.
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, the precious wheel of a wheel-turning emperor goes in front of the mass of four-unit forces and is positioned there. Wherever a wheel-turning emperor stops for food, the wheel-turning emperor’s mass of four-unit forces is refreshed but still the precious wheel does not move from its place. Similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is also the leader of these five perfections, going specifically to the knowledge of all aspects and remaining there. Once positioned there it does not pass beyond it. 
 “To illustrate further, Subhūti, the precious wheel of a wheel-turning emperor, the precious minister, the precious chamberlain, the precious queen, the precious jewel, the precious elephant, and the precious horse go in front of the mass of four-unit forces. Similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom also goes in front of these five perfections. Having gone in front of them, it remains specifically at the knowledge of all aspects, but it does not occur to the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘The perfection of giving should follow me, and the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance,  and perfection of concentration should follow me.’ It also does not occur to the perfection of giving to think, ‘I should follow the perfection of wisdom.’ Similarly, it also does not occur to the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, or perfection of concentration to think, ‘I should follow the perfection of wisdom.’ And why? Because in their intrinsic nature they are impotent, empty of an intrinsic nature, in vain, and the same as a mirage.”
 Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, if all phenomena are empty of an intrinsic nature, how will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving, the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here it occurs to bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections to think, ‘Ah! This ordinary state of being is a distorted state of mind. It is incapable of release from saṃsāra without skillful means, so, for the sake of those beings, I must practice the perfection of giving, the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom.’ 
 “They give away inner and outer things  for the sake of those beings. When they are giving them away it occurs to them to think, ‘I have not given anything away. Why? Because these things are empty of an intrinsic nature.’ Bodhisattva great beings reflecting deeply like that, Subhūti, complete the perfection of giving. 
 “They provide no opportunity for immorality, for the sake of those beings. Why? Because they think, ‘Insofar as I have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening I should not kill, up to have a wrong view, or yearn for the śrāvaka level or pratyekabuddha level.’ Bodhisattva great beings reflecting deeply like that, Subhūti, practice the perfection of morality. 
 “For the sake of those beings they do not let any mental disturbance at all arise. Bodhisattva great beings reflecting deeply like that, Subhūti, practice the perfection of patience. 
 “During the period up to when they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, for the sake of those beings they do not have a lazy thought. Bodhisattva great beings reflecting deeply like that, Subhūti, practice the perfection of perseverance. 
 “During the period up to when they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, for the sake of those beings they do not have a scattered thought. Bodhisattva great beings reflecting deeply like that, Subhūti, practice the perfection of concentration. 
 “During the period up to when they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,  for the sake of those beings they are never separated from wisdom. And why? Because it occurs to them to think, ‘Except for those who have entered into the perfection of wisdom, the others are incapable of bringing beings to maturity.’ Bodhisattva great beings reflecting deeply like that, Subhūti, practice the perfection of wisdom.” 
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, if the perfections are not different, why is the perfection of wisdom said to be the highest, and is said to be the most excellent, foremost, best, superb, sublime, unsurpassed, unrivaled, and equal to the unequaled when it comes to the five perfections?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! The perfections are not different in the slightest. Were there to be no perfection of wisdom these five perfections would not get the name perfection, so it is thanks to the perfection of wisdom, Subhūti, that these five perfections get the name perfection.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, when various sorts of physical beings have come into the presence of Sumeru, the king of mountains, those physical beings become a single color. Similarly, Subhūti, thanks to the perfection of wisdom these five perfections get the name perfection and, having entered into the knowledge of all aspects, they become a single color, which is to say there is no specific feature—‘This is the perfection of giving,’ connect this in the same way with each, up to ‘This is the perfection of wisdom’—at all.  And why? Because there they have no intrinsic nature. For that reason, there is no specific feature.”
 “Lord, given that there is no specific feature or variation in any phenomenon for someone who has entered into reality, why is the perfection of wisdom said to be the highest, and is said to be the most excellent, foremost, best, superb, sublime, unsurpassed, unrivaled, and equal to the unequaled, when it comes to the five perfections?”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! There is no specific feature or variation in any phenomenon for someone who has entered into reality, but still, in order to release beings from saṃsāra, because of the ordinary convention and conventional term there is the designation perfection of giving, and there are the designations perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom.
 “Furthermore, in regard to those beings, they are not born, they do not die, they do not leave, and they do not come forth. They do not exist. You should know that, since beings do not exist, all phenomena do not exist. Therefore, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is said to be the highest, and is said to be the most excellent, foremost, best, superb, sublime, unsurpassed, unrivaled, and equal to the unequaled when it comes to the five perfections.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, just as the precious lady is said to be the foremost, up to equal to the unequaled when it comes to the women in the world, as many as there are, similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom  is said to be the highest, up to equal to the unequaled when it comes to the five perfections.”
 “Lord, what do you intend by saying the perfection of wisdom is the highest, up to equal to the unequaled?”
 “Subhūti, it is because this perfection of wisdom will take hold of all wholesome dharmas and stand specifically in the knowledge of all aspects, by way of not taking a stand.” 
 “Lord, does the perfection of wisdom take hold of or release any dharma?”
 “No it does not, Subhūti; Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom does not take hold of or release any dharma. And why? Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are not grasped and are not released.”
 “Lord, what are all the dharmas the perfection of wisdom does not take hold of or release?”
 “Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom does not grasp or release form, connect this in the same way with each, up to and does not grasp or release awakening.” 
 “Lord, how is form, up to awakening not taken hold of and not released?”
 “Subhūti, those who do not pay attention to form, up to do not pay attention to awakening do not take hold of form.”
 “Lord, if there is no attention being paid to form, up to there is no attention being paid to the knowledge of all aspects, how, Lord, without attention to form, up to without attention to the knowledge of all aspects will the wholesome roots flourish? And if the wholesome roots do not flourish,  how will the perfections be completed? And if the perfections are not completed, how will the knowledge of all aspects be reached?”
 “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings do not pay attention to form, connect this in the same way with each, up to do not pay attention to awakening, then those bodhisattva great beings’ wholesome roots flourish and . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects is reached. And why? Because when no attention has been paid to form, up to no attention has been paid to awakening there will be full awakening.” 
 “Lord, why, when they thus do not pay attention to form, up to do not pay attention to awakening do they reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Subhūti, by paying attention they cling to the desire realm, or to the form realm, or to the formless realm; and when they have not paid attention they do not cling to anything. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not cling to any dharma.” 
 “Lord, where will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom stand?”
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing like that will not stand in form, up to will not stand in the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 “Lord, how will they not stand in form, up to not stand in the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Subhūti, they do not stand anywhere because of not settling down. And why?  It is because they do not see any dharma on which they might ‘settle down’ or ‘stand.’ In that way, Subhūti, by way of not settling down, bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom.
 “Subhūti, were it to occur to bodhisattva great beings to think, ‘Meditating like that and practicing like that is meditating on the perfection of wisdom. That is the meditation on the perfection of wisdom, so I too will practice the perfection of wisdom, I too will meditate on the perfection of wisdom’—were they to form such a notion they would be distant from the perfection of wisdom. Those who become distant from the perfection of wisdom become distant from the perfection of giving, connect this in the same way with each, up to and become distant from the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because the perfection of wisdom does not settle down on any dharma and there is no settling down on the perfection of wisdom at all. And why? Because the intrinsic nature of anything on which there might be ‘settling down’ does not exist.
 “If bodhisattva great beings form a notion of the perfection of wisdom, those bodhisattva great beings fall back from the perfection of wisdom, and those who have fallen back from the perfection of wisdom have fallen back from all dharmas. Bodhisattva great beings have fallen back from the perfection of wisdom if it occurs to them to think, ‘The perfection of wisdom incorporates the five perfections, incorporates . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects.’ They are separated from the perfection of wisdom and not able to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings have fallen back from the perfection of wisdom if it occurs to them to think, ‘There will be a prophecy of the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of someone who has stood in this perfection of wisdom.’ They have fallen back from this perfection of wisdom, and having fallen back from this perfection of wisdom there will not be a prophecy of their unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Bodhisattva great beings have fallen back from this perfection of wisdom if it occurs to them to think, ‘I will stand in this perfection of wisdom and accomplish the perfection of giving, up to accomplish great compassion.’ And why? Because those who have fallen back from the perfection of wisdom will not be able to accomplish the perfection of giving, up to will not be able to accomplish great compassion either. 
 “Furthermore, those bodhisattva great beings have fallen back from the perfection of wisdom if it occurs to them to think, ‘The Tathāgata, not having taken hold of all dharmas, fully awakened, and having fully awakened, personally taught, explained, and clarified.’ And why? Because tathāgatas have not fully awakened to any dharma. And why? Because they do not apprehend even this very life, so what need is there to say more about fully awakening to some dharma? It is impossible.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord,  “Lord, how will these faults of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom not occur?” 
 “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom think thus: ‘All phenomena are without attachment and have not been taken hold of. There is no phenomenon that will fully awaken to a phenomenon that is free from attachment and has not been taken hold of.’ If they practice like that, they practice the perfection of wisdom. But if bodhisattva great beings settle down on a phenomenon that has not been taken hold of, they are separated from the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because the perfection of wisdom cannot be spoken of as ‘settling down.’ ”
 “Lord, is the perfection of wisdom not separated from the perfection of wisdom, up to the perfection of giving is not separated from the perfection of giving, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not separated from . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects? Lord, if the perfection of wisdom is not separated from the perfection of wisdom, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not separated from the knowledge of all aspects, how, then, is the perfection of wisdom to be accomplished? How is the perfection of giving . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects to be accomplished?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here bodhisattva great beings  practicing the perfection of wisdom do not settle down on form, nor do they settle down on ‘this is form, this is its form.’ Connect this in the same way with each, up to all dharmas. They do not settle down on form as ‘permanent’ or ‘impermanent,’ ‘happiness,’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘self’ or ‘selfless,’ pleasant’ or ‘unpleasant,’ ‘calm’ or ‘not calm,’ ‘empty’ or ‘not empty,’ ‘isolated’ or ‘not isolated.’ Connect this in the same way with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Because they cannot accomplish ‘permanence’ or ‘impermanence,’ ‘happiness,’ or ‘suffering,’ ‘self’ or ‘selfless,’ pleasant’ or ‘unpleasant,’ ‘calm’ or ‘not calm,’ ‘empty’ or ‘not empty,’ ‘isolated’ or ‘not isolated’ in a dharma that has no intrinsic nature, because they cannot accomplish ‘an intrinsic nature that is empty of its intrinsic nature.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom . . . , connect this in the same way with each, up to and the perfection of giving like that will stand in the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Take as an illustration, Subhūti, the mass of four-unit forces of a wheel-turning emperor. Wherever the wheel-turning emperor goes, the mass of four-unit forces of a wheel-turning emperor goes there too. Similarly, with those five perfections, wherever the perfection of wisdom goes those five perfections go there too, and will stand specifically in the knowledge of all aspects.
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, a driver mounts on a chariot with four horses and goes smoothly on his way. Similarly, the perfection of wisdom is the driver of those five perfections and goes smoothly on its way specifically to the knowledge of all aspects.”
“Lord, what is the path of bodhisattva great beings, and what is not the path?”
“Subhūti, the śrāvaka path is not the path of bodhisattva great beings, and the pratyekabuddha path is not the path of bodhisattva great beings. The path of the knowledge of all aspects is the path. Subhūti, that is the path of bodhisattva great beings. That is not the path.”
“Lord, the perfection of wisdom teaching, ‘this is the path; this is not the path,’ has been made available because it is of great value to bodhisattva great beings.”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “The perfection of wisdom teaching, ‘this is the path and not the path,’ has been made available because it is of great value to bodhisattva great beings—it has been made available because it is of great value to countless beings—but, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom does not teach anything at all. It does not incorporate form. It does not incorporate feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. It has not been set up in order to incorporate the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level. This perfection of wisdom  is the bodhisattva great beings’ guide to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. It is not the guide to the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level. It causes attainment of the knowledge of all aspects.
“Thus, this perfection of wisdom, having taken the establishment of dharmas as authority, does not produce any phenomenon and does not stop any phenomenon.”
 “Lord, if the perfection of wisdom does not produce and does not stop any phenomenon, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom give gifts, how do they guard morality, how do they cultivate patience, how do they make an effort at perseverance, how do they become absorbed in concentration, and how do they cultivate wisdom?”
 “Subhūti, having turned the knowledge of all aspects into an objective support they should give gifts, having turned the knowledge of all aspects into an objective support they should guard morality, having turned the knowledge of all aspects into an objective support they should cultivate patience, having turned the knowledge of all aspects into an objective support they should make an effort at perseverance, having turned the knowledge of all aspects into an objective support they should become absorbed in concentration, having made the knowledge of all aspects into an objective support they should cultivate wisdom, and having made those wholesome roots into something shared in common by all beings they should dedicate them to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. When they have dedicated those wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening like that, the cultivation  of the six perfections becomes complete, up to the bodhisattva great beings’ cultivation of love becomes complete, up to cultivation of the knowledge of all aspects becomes complete. Any bodhisattva great being inseparable from the six perfections is inseparable from the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should train in the six perfections; they should practice the six perfections. Bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections complete all the wholesome roots and, having done so, gain the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should make an effort at the six perfections.” 
 “Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings make an effort at the six perfections?”
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings should understand analytically like this, that form is not conjoined and not disjoined; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not conjoined and not disjoined; and similarly, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not conjoined and not disjoined. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should make an effort at the six perfections like that. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings should not work with the idea, ‘I will stand in form’; up to should not work with the idea,  ‘I will stand in consciousness’; up to and should not work with the idea, ‘I will stand in the knowledge of all aspects.’ And why? Because form is not situated anywhere, up to the knowledge of all aspects is not situated anywhere. That is the way bodhisattva great beings should fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, by way of not standing.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, a man might want to eat the fruit of a mango tree or the fruit of a jackfruit tree. He would have to plant a mango or a jackfruit. Having planted it he would have to water it and have to weed it from time to time until, gradually growing branches and ripening, having found all the necessary conditions, mangos or jackfruit become complete in all their richness. Then he will eat the mangos or jackfruit. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, should train in the six perfections, look after beings with giving, look after beings with morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom, and liberate beings from saṃsāra. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to reach the state where they do not have to place trust in others, want to purify a buddhafield, want to be seated at the site of awakening, and want to turn the wheel of the Dharma should train in the six perfections.” 
 “Lord, are you saying they have to train in the perfection of wisdom with the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti, I am saying they have to train in the perfection of wisdom with the perfection of wisdom. I am saying they have to train in the perfection of wisdom if they want to accomplish the development of control over all dharmas. And why? Because this perfection of wisdom causes the accomplishment of the state where all dharmas have become fully controlled. This perfection of wisdom is the gateway of all dharmas. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, the ocean is the gateway of all rivers and when all the river waters flow into the ocean they become of one taste. Similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is the gateway to all dharmas, and all dharmas, when they have been categorized, turn into the perfection of wisdom.
 “Therefore, Subhūti, persons in the Śrāvaka Vehicle and in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle as well as persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle should train in just this perfection of wisdom. Therefore, bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of giving, and should train in the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom, up to and should train in the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, opponents or enemies are hard pressed to overpower a master archer shooting with a customized bow. Similarly, Subhūti, Māra and the Māra class of gods are hard pressed to overpower  a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Past, future, and present lord buddhas watch over those practicing the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, how do the lord buddhas watch over those practicing the perfection of giving? How do they watch over those practicing the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord replied to him, “Subhūti, here the lord buddhas watch over the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, but they do not apprehend giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom at all. Thus, without apprehending anything they watch over the bodhisattva great beings. Similarly, connect this in full with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, the lord buddhas do not watch over bodhisattva great beings  as form, up to do not watch over them as the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 “Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want to train in many places should not train anywhere.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to train in many places should not train anywhere. And why? Because those dharmas in which bodhisattva great beings have to train cannot be apprehended.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, given that the Tathāgata has taught the dharmas briefly and in detail, there bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should master these six perfections until they can recite them perfectly by heart. Having perfectly recited them by heart they should mentally reflect on them, but reflect on them in such a way that the mind and mental factor dharmas are not set in motion at all.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training in those six perfections taught briefly and in detail will come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail.”
 “Lord, how will bodhisattva great beings come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail?” 
 “Subhūti, when they know the suchness of form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness, up to know the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects, they will come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail.” 
 “Lord, what is the suchness of form?”
 “Subhūti, the suchness of form is that in which there is no production, there is no stopping, there is no lasting, and there is no changing into something else. Bodhisattva great beings should train in that. 
 “When they know the very limit of reality, they will come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail.”
 “Lord, what is the very limit of reality?”
 He said, “Subhūti, the very limit of reality is the limitless. Bodhisattva great beings training at that limit will come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail. 
 “When bodhisattva great beings know the dharma-constituent, they will come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail.”
 “Lord, what is the dharma-constituent?”
 “Subhūti, the dharma-constituent is constituentless and there is no severance or limitation of that dharma-constituent. Bodhisattva great beings who know the dharma-constituent like that will come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail.” 
 “Lord, how should all dharmas be known in brief and in detail?”
 “Subhūti, all dharmas should be known as not conjoined and not disjoined.” 
 “Lord, what are the dharmas that are not conjoined and are not disjoined?”
 “Subhūti, form is not conjoined and is not disjoined; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not conjoined and is not disjoined; connect this in the same way with each, up to the compounded element and the uncompounded element are not conjoined and are not disjoined. And why? Because that which might become conjoined or disjoined has no intrinsic nature, and that which has no intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing, and a nonexistent thing is not conjoined with and is not disjoined from a nonexistent thing. 
 “Subhūti, this is the summation for the bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings beginning the work should train in this perfection summation, and those on the tenth level should train in just this summation too. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training in this summation will come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail.”
 “Lord, this is the entrance for bodhisattva great beings with keen faculties.”
 “Subhūti, this is the entrance for bodhisattva great beings with dull faculties as well. This is also the entrance for those with middling faculties, and for those with faculties not yet stabilized in meditation. For any bodhisattva great beings who want to train it is not not an entrance. But it is not the entrance for the lazy, it is not the entrance  for those deficient in perseverance, robbed of mindfulness, and mentally distracted. It is the entrance for those who are energetic, not lazy, and with applied mindfulness. It is the entrance for those who want to train on the irreversible level and who want to reach the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “If they train in the perfection of wisdom as it has been taught, having trained in the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration, they will reach the knowledge of all aspects. Subhūti, for bodhisattva great beings who go on practicing the perfection of wisdom, the works of Māra, whatever they are, are eliminated the moment they happen. Therefore, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully grasp skillful means should train in the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, cultivate the perfection of wisdom, and make an effort at the perfection of wisdom, the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in countless world systems, those lord buddhas also watch over those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom. And why? Because those past, future, and present lord buddhas have issued forth from this, namely these six perfections. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  should also be optimistic and think like this: ‘I too will gain the dharmas those past, future, and present lord buddhas gained.’ 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should make such an effort. Bodhisattva great beings making such an effort will quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should not become separated from attention to the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Subhūti, if, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate the perfection of wisdom even for as long as a finger snap, those bodhisattva great beings will create a lot more merit. Those who have satisfied beings included in a great billionfold world system with gifts; have established them in morality; have established them in meditative stabilization, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and seeing of liberation; have established them in the result of stream enterer, up to in the state of a worthy one; and have established them in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening do not do so. When they have cultivated this deep perfection of wisdom for as long as a finger snap, just that creates a lot more merit. And why? Because giving, morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and seeing of liberation, the result of stream enterer, up to a pratyekabuddha’s awakening have been born from her. The lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in the ten directions  have also issued forth from just this perfection of wisdom, and those categories of past, future, and present lord buddhas are because of just this perfection of wisdom as well. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, if someone cultivates this deep perfection of wisdom with attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects just for the time it takes to blink, or for one day or a hundred days, or a year or a hundred years, or an eon or more than an eon, up to an asaṃkhyeya of eons, just that will create a lot more merit. Establishing beings included in world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in giving, up to establishing them in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening will not do so. And why? Because those lord buddhas who have designated this as the basis of meritorious action arisen from giving, designated . . . , up to a pratyekabuddha’s awakening have also issued forth from just her. 
 “You should know that bodhisattva great beings thus standing in this perfection of wisdom as it has been taught are the bodhisattva great beings who will not turn back. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings are looked out for by the tathāgatas. You should know that bodhisattva great beings who are endowed with these skillful means are those who have attended on many hundred thousand one hundred million billion buddhas. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings have planted wholesome roots; you should know that those bodhisattva great beings have been assisted by spiritual friends;  you should know that those bodhisattva great beings have practiced the practice of the six perfections; and you should know that those bodhisattva great beings have meditated on and thought about the fourteen emptinesses.Connect this in the same way with each, up to you should know that those bodhisattva great beings have meditated on the four detailed and thorough knowledges. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings have the six clairvoyances; that those bodhisattva great beings have become the heirs apparent; and that those bodhisattva great beings have fulfilled all their ambitions. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings are not separated from the buddhas, are not separated from wholesome roots, are not separated from a buddhafield, and have obtained an unbroken confidence giving a readiness to speak, and the dhāraṇīs. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings have perfected bodies. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings are in possession of a prophecy. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings are born in a suffering existence at will. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings are skilled in entering into aspects and are skilled in the conventional. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings are skilled in entering into what does not have letters and are skilled in entering into the unconventional. You should know that those bodhisattva great beings are skilled in singular words, skilled in plural words, skilled in feminine words, and skilled in masculine words; are skilled in form, up to and skilled in consciousness; connect this in the same way with each, up to are skilled in nirvāṇa, and skilled in the dharma-constituent; are skilled in marks, skilled in the marks of compounded things, and skilled in things without a mark; are skilled in being, skilled in nonbeing, skilled in intrinsic existence, and skilled in dependent existence; are skilled in conjunction, skilled in disjunction, skilled in the accompanied, skilled in the unaccompanied, and skilled in the neither accompanied nor unaccompanied; are skilled in suchness, skilled in unmistaken suchness, skilled in unaltered suchness, skilled in the dharma-constituent, skilled in the establishment of dharmas, and skilled in the certification of dharmas; are skilled in what has causes and conditions, skilled in the unconditioned, skilled in the aggregates, skilled in the constituents, skilled in the sense fields, skilled in the truths, and skilled in dependent origination; are skilled in the concentrations, skilled in the immeasurables, and skilled in the formless absorptions; are skilled in the perfections, skilled in the four applications of mindfulness, up to and skilled in the knowledge of all aspects; are skilled in the compounded element, skilled in the uncompounded element, skilled in elements, and skilled in non-elements; skilled in attention to form, up to and skilled in attention to consciousness; connect this in the same way with each, up to and skilled in attention to the knowledge of all aspects; are skilled in ‘form is empty of form,’ up to skilled in ‘consciousness is empty of consciousness,’ connect this in the same way with each, up to skilled in ‘awakening is empty of awakening’;  are skilled in the path with pliancy, and skilled in the path without pliancy; are skilled in production, stopping, and lasting and changing into something else; are skilled in greed, skilled in hatred, skilled in confusion, skilled in being without greed, skilled in being without hatred, skilled in being without confusion, skilled in the view and skilled in not the view, skilled in wrong view and not wrong view, connect this in the same way with each, up to and skilled in all forms of views; are skilled in name, skilled in name and form, skilled in objective supports, and skilled in dominant conditions; are skilled in aspects and skilled in marks; are skilled in suffering, skilled in origination, skilled in cessation, and skilled in the path; are skilled in hells, skilled in the animal world, skilled in the world of Yama, skilled in the path to the world of Yama, skilled in the path to the hells, skilled in the path to the animal world, skilled in the human’s path, skilled in the gods, and skilled in the path to the gods; are skilled in the result of stream enterer, skilled in the path to the result of stream enterer, skilled in the result of once-returner, skilled in the path to the result of once-returner, skilled in the result of non-returner, skilled in the path to the result of non-returner, skilled in the result that is the state of a worthy one, skilled in the path to the result that is the state of a worthy one, skilled in the result that is a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and skilled in the path to the result that is a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; are skilled in the knowledge of path aspects,  skilled in the knowledge of all aspects, and skilled in the path to the knowledge of all aspects; are skilled in faculties and skilled in completed faculties; are skilled in quick wisdom, skilled in keen wisdom, skilled in speedy wisdom, skilled in penetrating wisdom, skilled in expansive wisdom, and skilled in unequaled wisdom; are skilled in times gone by, skilled in times yet to come, and skilled in the present time; and are skilled in skillful means, skilled in the aspirations of beings, skilled in surpassing aspiration, skilled in meanings, skilled in letters, and skilled in the presentation of the three vehicles.
 “Subhūti, you should know that those are the benefits when bodhisattva great beings have practiced the perfection of wisdom, have accomplished the perfection of wisdom, and have meditated on the perfection of wisdom.”
ye dharmā hetu-prabhavā hetun teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat. teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahā­śramaṇa.
ye dharmā hetu-prabhavā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat. teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahā­śramaṇa.
ye dharmā hetu-prabhavā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat. teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahā­śramaṇa.
 “Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, accomplish the perfection of wisdom, and meditate on the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “they should practice the perfection of wisdom through the calmness of form, through the fraudulence of form, through the vanity of form, and through the pointlessness of form. They should practice the perfection of wisdom through the calmness of feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness, through the fraudulence of consciousness, through the vanity of consciousness, and through the pointlessness of consciousness. 
 “You ask, ‘How should they accomplish the perfection of wisdom?’ They should accomplish the perfection of wisdom  by accomplishing a space-like emptiness. 
 “You ask, ‘How should they meditate on the perfection of wisdom?’ They should meditate on the perfection of wisdom by meditating on a space-like emptiness.” 
 “Lord, for bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, how long is the practice of the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “starting from the first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, they should practice the perfection of wisdom, and similarly accomplish it, and similarly meditate on it.”
 “Lord, should they practice with an unbroken, unseparated stream of thoughts connected one after the other?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “they should practice the perfection of wisdom without providing an opportunity for other attention. They should practice the perfection of wisdom, should accomplish the perfection of wisdom, and should meditate on the perfection of wisdom without relaxing attention to the knowledge of all aspects. They should practice, and similarly should accomplish, and similarly should meditate on the perfection of wisdom in such a way that mind and mental factor dharmas are not set in motion at all.”
 “Lord, will bodhisattva great beings who have practiced the perfection of wisdom, accomplished the perfection of wisdom, and meditated on the perfection of wisdom  reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Well then, Lord, will they without having meditated?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Well then, Lord, will they having meditated when they meditated, and without having mediated when they did not meditate?” 
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Well then, Lord, will they without having meditated and without having not meditated?” 
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Well then, Lord, how will they reach the knowledge of all aspects?” 
 “Just as suchness will, Subhūti.” 
 “Lord, how will suchness?” 
 “Just as the very limit of reality will, Subhūti.” 
 “Lord, how will the very limit of reality?” 
 “Just as the dharma-constituent will, Subhūti.” 
 “Lord, how will the dharma-constituent?” 
 “Just as the self element, the being element, the living being element, and the person element will, Subhūti.” 
 “Lord, how will the self element, up to the person element?” 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, can you apprehend a self and a being?” 
 “No, Lord.” 
 “Subhūti, how will those who cannot apprehend a self or a being label a being element? Thus, Subhūti, those who do not label a being, do not label the perfection of wisdom, and do not label all dharmas will reach the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 “Lord, is the perfection of wisdom something that cannot be labeled?  Are the perfection of concentration, perfection of perseverance, perfection of patience, perfection of morality, and perfection of giving something that cannot be labeled?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the perfection of wisdom cannot be labeled. Compounded or uncompounded, śrāvaka dharmas or pratyekabuddha dharmas, up to all dharmas cannot be labeled.”
 “Lord, if all dharmas cannot be labeled, why, Lord, does hell have a label, the animal world have a label, the world of Yama have a label, humans and gods have labels, stream enterers up to worthy ones have labels, and why does unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening have a label?”
 “Subhūti,” asked the Lord in return, “what do you think, can a being that is a label be apprehended?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, how, given that you cannot apprehend a being, will you label hell, the animal world, the world of Yama, humans and gods, stream enterers up to worthy ones, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should thus train in phenomena that cannot be labeled.”
 “Well then, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom train in form; do they train in feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to do they train in the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Subhūti, they should train in form without taking anything away and without adding anything, up to they should train in the knowledge of all aspects without taking anything away and without adding anything.”
 “Lord, how will they train in . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects without taking anything away and without adding anything?”
 “Subhūti, they should train in those as not produced and not stopping.” 
 “Lord, how should they train in form as not produced and not stopping, up to how should they train in the knowledge of all aspects as not produced and not stopping?”
 “Subhūti, they should train without occasioning anything, without meditating on and without investigating volitional factors.”
 “Lord, how should they train without occasioning anything?”
 “Subhūti, they should train without occasioning anything by seeing that all dharmas are empty of their own marks.”
 “Lord, how should they train in all dharmas empty of their own marks?”
 “Subhūti, they should view form as empty of form, they should view feeling as empty of feeling, they should view perception as empty of perception, they should view volitional factors as empty of volitional factors, and they should view consciousness as empty of consciousness. They should view the eyes as empty of the eyes, up to they should view thinking mind as empty of thinking mind. They should view inner emptiness as empty of inner emptiness, up to they should view the emptiness of its own mark as empty of the emptiness of its own mark. They should view the concentrations as empty of the concentrations, up to they should view cessation absorption as empty of cessation absorption.  They should view the applications of mindfulness as empty of the applications of mindfulness, up to they should view awakening as empty of awakening. Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings should train in all dharmas empty of their own marks.”
 “Lord, if form is empty of form, up to even awakening is empty of awakening, well then, Lord, how will bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti, not practicing is the bodhisattvas’ practice of the perfection of wisdom.”
 “Lord, why is not practicing the practice of the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti, it is because a perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended, a bodhisattva cannot be apprehended, a practice cannot be apprehended, and something being practiced, some way of practicing, and some place for practice cannot be apprehended. The bodhisattva great beings’ practice of the perfection of wisdom is there, Subhūti, where all those thought constructions are not apprehended.”
 “Lord, if not practicing is the practice of the perfection of wisdom, how then will bodhisattva great beings who are beginning the work practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti, here, starting from the first production of the thought, thus bodhisattva great beings beginning the work train in all phenomena as providing no basis for apprehension. When they give a gift they should give the gift by way of not apprehending anything; when they guard morality, they should guard morality by way of not apprehending anything; when they make a practice of patience, they should make a practice of being patient by way of not apprehending anything; when they make a vigorous effort, they should make a vigorous effort  by way of not apprehending anything; when they become absorbed in meditative stabilization, they should become absorbed in meditative stabilization by way of not apprehending anything; and when they cultivate wisdom, they should cultivate wisdom by way of not apprehending anything, and similarly, up to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Lord, to what extent does not apprehending come about, and to what extent does apprehending come about?”
 “Subhūti, to the extent that there is duality, to that extent there is apprehending; nonduality is the absence of apprehending.”
 “Lord, what is duality?”
 “Subhūti, to the extent that there are eyes and a form, up to a thinking mind and a dharma, and up to awakening and a buddha, Subhūti, that is duality.” 
 “Lord, what is nonduality?”
 “Subhūti, to the extent that there are no eyes and form, up to no thinking mind and dharma, and up to no awakening and a buddha, Subhūti, that is nonduality.” 
 “Does the unfindable provide a basis for not apprehending or does the findable provide a basis for not apprehending?”
 “Subhūti, neither does the findable provide a basis for not apprehending nor does the unfindable provide a basis for not apprehending, but still, Subhūti, the sameness of the findable and the unfindable is the unfindable. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should thus train in the sameness of what does and does not provide a basis for apprehending. Training like that, bodhisattva great beings will not apprehend anything in the perfection of wisdom.” 
 “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are not attached to apprehending and are not attached to not apprehending, how, Lord, will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete  level after level, and how, having completed level after level, will they reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom standing on a basis for apprehending will not complete level after level. Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom will not, having stood on a basis for apprehending, be able to complete level after level. And why? Subhūti, it is because a perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended, awakening cannot be apprehended, and someone practicing the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended either. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of wisdom like that.”
 “Lord, if a perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended, awakening cannot be apprehended, and someone practicing the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended either, well then, how will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom make an investigation—‘this is form, this is feeling, this is perception, these are volitional factors, this is consciousness,’ up to ‘this is awakening’—into all these dharmas that are without an intrinsic nature?”
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who do it in such a way that they apprehend form, up to apprehend consciousness, up to apprehend awakening do not make an investigation into dharmas.”
 “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend form, up to do not apprehend consciousness, up to do not apprehend awakening, well then, how will they complete the perfection of giving; enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva;  having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva, purify a buddhafield; having purified a buddhafield, bring beings to maturity; having brought beings to maturity, gain the knowledge of all aspects; having gained the knowledge of all aspects, turn the wheel of the Dharma; having turned the wheel of the Dharma, do the work of a buddha; and having done the work of a buddha free all beings from saṃsāra?”
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of form, up to they do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of awakening.” 
 “Well then, Lord, for the sake of what do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of anything. And why? Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are unmade, all dharmas are unchanging; the perfection of wisdom is unmade and unchanging, awakening too is unmade and unchanging, and bodhisattvas are unmade and unchanging as well. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of wisdom like that in an unmade and unchanging way.”
 “Lord, if all dharmas are unmade and are unchanging, well then, Lord, how is there an arrangement of three vehicles—the Śrāvaka Vehicle, Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and Buddha Vehicle?”
 “Subhūti, no arrangement  at all can be apprehended in dharmas that are unmade and unchanging. An arrangement can be apprehended in dharmas that occasion something and have collected together. And why? Because simple, unlettered, ordinary folk settle down on the five aggregates. They settle down on a form aggregate, up to settle down on a consciousness aggregate, up to settle down on a knowledge of all aspects. They falsely project form, falsely consider form a fact, up to and they falsely project awakening, up to falsely consider awakening a fact. It occurs to them to think, ‘I will fully awaken to awakening. I will free beings from saṃsāra.’ And why? Subhūti, it is because even though that form, up to that awakening are not apprehended by the buddhas’ five eyes, still those ignorant persons speak ill of the buddha and want to free beings from saṃsāra.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, if a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha were not to apprehend with the five eyes those beings they free from saṃsāra, how then would the Lord, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, have prophesied beings in the three groups as those destined for the perfect state, those destined to be wrong, and those not necessarily destined?”
 “Subhūti, I, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, have not apprehended any being at all destined for the perfect state, destined to be wrong, or not necessarily destined. Nevertheless, Subhūti, as an ordinary convention, but not ultimately, I keep these beings without a material reality  who perceive a material reality away from seizing on the unreal.” 
 “But Lord, the tathāgatas stood in the ultimate and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Well then, Lord, the tathāgatas stood in a succession of miraculous powers and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, if they neither stood in the ultimate and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening nor stood in a succession of miraculous powers and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, well then, Lord, it surely would not be the case that the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas did not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, would it?” 
 “Subhūti, it is not that the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have not fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Subhūti, the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have indeed fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening but do not stand in the compounded element or the uncompounded element. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, a tathāgata’s magical creation does not stand in the compounded element or the uncompounded element but still that tathāgata’s magical creation goes and comes, stands and sits. Were it to practice the perfection of giving; practice the perfection of morality, perfection of patience,  perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom; have accomplished and dwell in the four concentrations; cultivate the four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, five clairvoyances, four applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path; cultivate the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization; cultivate inner emptiness, up to emptiness of its own mark; cultivate the eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and great compassion; and have turned the wheel of the Dharma—and were that magical creation also to have magically created and made a prophecy about infinite beings in the three groups—what do you think, Subhūti, would that magical creation have made a prophecy about any being in the three groups?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Similarly, Subhūti, the tathāgatas understand that all phenomena are like magical creations, and, having understood that they are like magical creations, have not led any being at all. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should cultivate the perfection of wisdom like that, as it really is, like a tathāgata’s magical creation.”
 “Lord, if all dharmas are like magical creations, then what distinction and what differentiation, Lord, is there between a tathāgata and a magical creation? What is your intention?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, there is no distinction at all between a tathāgata and a tathāgata’s magical creation; no differentiation at all can be apprehended. Subhūti, a tathāgata and a tathāgata’s magical creation  are without distinguishing features. And why? Because the magical creation does whatever the work a tathāgata does.”
 “Lord, when there is no Tathāgata, does the Tathāgata’s magical creation do the work?”
 “It does, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, when there is no tathāgata, how does the Tathāgata’s magical creation do the work?”
 “To illustrate, people know, ‘The tathāgata Śāntamati, finding no bodhisattva, magically created a magical creation and passed into nirvāṇa. That magical creation did the work of a buddha for more than an eon. Later on, it prophesied the awakening of a bodhisattva and passed into nirvāṇa.’ Nevertheless, that magical creation was not born and did not pass into complete nirvāṇa. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings believing all dharmas to be like magical creations should practice the perfection of wisdom.” 
 “Lord, if there is no distinction at all between a magical creation and a tathāgata, how will there be a pure gift? Lord, the merit from the gifts beings set before the Tathāgata never finishes until they have passed into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. Similarly, Lord, does the merit from the gifts beings have set before a magical creation never finish until they have passed into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind as well?”
 “Subhūti, the true nature of dharmas on account of which the Tathāgata has become worthy of the offerings of the world with its celestial beings is just that true nature of dharmas on account of which the magical creation has become worthy  of the offerings of the world with its celestial beings. 
 “Let alone a gift presented to a tathāgata, Subhūti, and let alone a gift presented to a tathāgata’s magical creation, if some benevolent sons of a good family or daughters of a good family pay attention to the Tathāgata, that wholesome root will not come to an end and they will all reach the end of suffering. Subhūti, let alone benevolent attention to the Tathāgata, if some sons of a good family or daughters of a good family throw a flower in salutation into the sky while paying attention to the Tathāgata, that wholesome root will not come to an end and they will all reach the end of suffering. Subhūti, let alone benevolent attention to the Tathāgata, and let alone throwing a flower in salutation into the sky, Subhūti, if some sons of a good family or daughters of a good family bow down to the buddha, they will all gradually reach the end of suffering. Subhūti, a gift presented to a tathāgata is so powerful and as greatly beneficial as that.
 “Through this one of many explanations, Subhūti, you should take the mark that makes a dharma a dharma as your measure and know that there is not even the slightest distinction between a tathāgata and a tathāgata’s magical creation. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of wisdom like that. 
 “Having entered into that true dharmic nature of dharmas they should not complicate the true nature of dharmas with the idea, ‘This is the perfection of wisdom, this is the true dharmic nature of the perfection of wisdom.’ Similarly, connect this with each, up to all dharmas.” 
 “Lord, the true dharmic nature of all dharmas should not be made complicated, but has the Lord not complicated the true dharmic nature of all dharmas on account of the Tathāgata saying ‘this is form,’ up to ‘this is consciousness,’ and similarly with inner and outer dharmas, and similarly with wholesome and unwholesome dharmas, and dharmas with outflows and without outflows, ordinary and extraordinary, shared in common and not shared in common, and compounded and uncompounded?” 
 “No, Subhūti, I have simply taught the true dharmic nature of dharmas and explained dharmas with words and signs motivated by the thought, ‘How will others comprehend?’ So, the true dharmic nature of all dharmas has not been made complicated.” 
 “Lord, if the Lord has taught the true dharmic nature of dharmas and explained dharmas with words and signs in order that others will comprehend, why, Lord, have you given an explanation in words and signs of dharmas that have no names and have no signs?”
 “Subhūti, conventional language is not to do with settling down on names and signs; otherwise, Subhūti, conventional language would be simply just suffering. There is no settling down to do with names and signs. Subhūti, a tathāgata and a tathāgata’s śrāvakas do not settle down on names and signs. Subhūti, were a name to settle down on a name, or were a sign to settle down on a sign, then emptiness would settle down on emptiness, signlessness would settle down on signlessness, wishlessness would settle down on wishlessness, and suchness too would settle down on suchness; the very limit of reality would settle down on the very limit of reality, the dharma-constituent would settle down on the dharma-constituent, and the uncompounded would settle down  on the uncompounded. Subhūti, all dharmas are thus simply mere names; they do not persist as mere names. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should thus practice the perfection of wisdom standing in a mere name and sign, without settling down on it.”
 “Lord, if all dharmas finish as a mere name and sign, well then, for what do bodhisattva great beings produce the thought to be awakened, and having produced the thought experience the many various forms of volitional factors, pursue the bodhisattva way of life, give a gift, guard morality, make a practice of being patient, make a vigorous effort, become absorbed in meditative stabilization, cultivate wisdom, cultivate emptiness, keep on with the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions, keep on with the applications of mindfulness, keep on with the right efforts, keep on with the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, keep on with the ten tathāgata powers, and complete . . . , up to great compassion?”
 “Subhūti, you have asked, ‘If all dharmas finish as a mere name and sign, well then, for what do bodhisattva great beings pursue the bodhisattva way of life?’ Subhūti, it is because all these volitional factors are simply mere names and signs, and those names and signs are empty of names and signs. That is why bodhisattva great beings pursue the bodhisattva way of life and gain the knowledge of all aspects, and having gained the knowledge of all aspects turn the wheel of the Dharma,  and having turned the wheel of the Dharma cause beings to pass into complete nirvāṇa in the three vehicles. The production, stopping, lasting, and changing of those names and signs into something else does not exist and cannot be apprehended.” 
 “Lord, you say ‘knowledge of all aspects’ again and again.”
 “Subhūti, I do say ‘knowledge of all aspects’ again and again.”
 “Lord, the Tathāgata has also said ‘all-knowledge,’ the Tathāgata has also said ‘knowledge of path aspects’ in the sutra, and the Tathāgata has also said ‘knowledge of all aspects.’ What distinction and what differentiation, Lord, is there between these three types of omniscience?”
 “Subhūti, all-knowledge belongs to śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas; the knowledge of path aspects, Subhūti, to bodhisattva great beings; and the knowledge of all aspects, Subhūti, to the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.”
 “Lord, why does the knowledge of all aspects belong to tathāgatas, why the knowledge of path aspects to bodhisattva great beings, and why all-knowledge to śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “it is because śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas know all those inner and outer dharmas, as many as there are, but not all paths and all aspects. 
 “Subhūti, you have asked, ‘Lord, why  does the knowledge of path aspects belong to bodhisattva great beings?’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings have to produce all paths, have to understand all paths, and they have to fully complete all paths—the śrāvaka paths, pratyekabuddha paths, and bodhisattva paths. On those paths they do the path work to be done but do not actualize the very limit of reality.”
 “Lord, will bodhisattva great beings not complete the buddha path and will they also not actualize the very limit of reality?”
 “Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings do not actualize the very limit of reality until they have purified a buddhafield and brought beings to maturity.”
 “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings actualize the very limit of reality having stood on the path?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Well then, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings actualize the very limit of reality having stood on what is not the path?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Well then, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings actualize the very limit of reality having stood on both the path and what is not the path?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Well then, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings actualize the very limit of reality having stood on neither the path nor on what is not the path?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Well then, Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings actualize the very limit of reality?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, have you stood on the path and stopped appropriating anything and become freed in your heart from outflows?” 
 “No, Lord,” replied Subhūti.
 “Well then, Subhūti, have you from having stood on what is not the path?” he asked.
 “No, Lord.”
 “Well then, Subhūti, have you from having stood on both the path and what is not the path?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Well then, Subhūti, have you stood on neither the path nor what is not the path and stopped appropriating anything and become freed in your heart from outflows?”
 “No, Lord,” replied Subhūti. “Lord, I have not become freed in my heart from outflows having stood anywhere, but Lord, my heart, because I have not stood anywhere, is a heart that is freed.”
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings actualize the very limit of reality without having stood anywhere. 
 “Subhūti, that one aspect on account of which the ‘knowledge of all aspects’ spoken of again and again is called ‘knowledge of all aspects’ is thus the calm aspect. Subhūti, also those aspects, tokens, and signs on account of which phenomena are described as ‘empty’—those aspects, tokens, and signs are understood by the Tathāgata as well. Therefore, it is called the ‘knowledge of all aspects.’ ”
 “Lord,” he asked further, “from among the three types of omniscience—all-knowledge, knowledge of path aspects, and knowledge of all aspects—is there a difference in the abandonment of affliction such that it is said, ‘with its abandonment there is something left over,’ but ‘with its abandonment there is nothing left over’?” 
 “Subhūti, there is no difference in the abandonment of affliction, but still the Tathāgata has an abandonment of all residual impression connections.  Śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas do not have the abandonment of all residual impression connections.” 
 “Lord, before reaching the knowledge of all aspects is there an uncompounded abandonment of afflictions?”
 “Indeed there is, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, are differences apprehended in the uncompounded?”
 “No, Subhūti,” said the Lord. “Differences are not apprehended in the uncompounded.”
 “Lord, if differences are not apprehended in the uncompounded, why does the Lord say, ‘This is an abandonment of residual impression connections. This is not an abandonment of residual impression connections’?”
 “Subhūti, a residual impression connection is not an affliction. Śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas have a separation from greed, hatred, and confusion, but they still do odd things with their bodies. These are not even bad in ordinary persons, and not in śrāvakas either, but they do not happen with a tathāgata.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if the path is not an existent thing and nirvāṇa is not an existent thing, why is it taught that ‘this is a stream enterer; this is a once-returner; this is a non-returner; this is a worthy one; and this is a pratyekabuddha’?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “stream enterer, up to tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha—all of these are categories of the uncompounded.”
 “Lord, does something uncompounded make the categories ‘this is a stream enterer,’ up to ‘this is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly  complete buddha’?”
 “Subhūti, the uncompounded does not make categories, but still, having taken ordinary convention as the authority, they are simply spoken about, even though ultimately there cannot be categories. And why? Subhūti, it is because there is no opportunity for speech designation there.” 
 “Lord, how will a later limit be designated?”
 “Subhūti, having taken ordinary convention as the authority, those for whom an end is demarcated are designated as having a later limit, but not ultimately.” 
 “Lord, if in all phenomena empty of their own marks a prior limit is not apprehended, what need is there to say more about a later limit?”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Given that a prior limit of all phenomena empty of their own marks is not apprehended, what need is there to say more about a later limit? It is impossible. But still, Subhūti, there is simply an explanation that ‘this is the prior limit, this is the later limit’ for those beings who do not understand that all phenomena are empty of their own marks, even though, Subhūti, a prior limit and later limit of phenomena empty of their own marks cannot be apprehended. So, bodhisattva great beings, Subhūti, should thus practice the perfection of wisdom with all phenomena empty of their own marks. Practicing with all phenomena empty of their own marks, they do not settle down anywhere—on inner or outer, or compounded or uncompounded, or śrāvaka dharmas or pratyekabuddha dharmas.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, you say ‘perfection of wisdom’ again and again. Why, Lord,  is it called ‘perfection of wisdom’?” 
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “this perfection of wisdom is, of all dharmas, perfect; therefore, it is called perfection of wisdom. 
 “Also, Subhūti, with this perfection of wisdom all śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattva great beings, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have reached the other side of all dharmas; therefore, it is called perfection of wisdom.
 “Also, Subhūti, with this perfection of wisdom the Tathāgata has fully awakened to the fact that all dharmas are not ultimately different; therefore, it is called perfection of wisdom.
 “Also, Subhūti, gone into this perfection of wisdom is suchness, gone into it is the very limit of reality, and gone into it is the true nature of dharmas; therefore, it is called perfection of wisdom.
 “Also, Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom is neither conjoined with nor disjoined from any dharma; it neither shows nor does not show itself, and is neither obstructed nor not obstructed. And why? Because this perfection of wisdom is formless, does not show itself, is not obstructed, and has only one mark—that is, no mark.
 “Also, Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom causes the practice of all dharmas, bestows all confidences and all insights, and is something that Māra and the Māra class of gods, and persons in the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles, cannot stop, up to and that other tīrthika opponents cannot stop. And why? Subhūti,  it is because all those who do the stopping, those who will stop, and the stopping—none of those can be apprehended in the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice this perfection of wisdom like that.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the reality of the perfection of wisdom—namely, they should practice the reality of impermanence, they should practice the reality of suffering, they should practice the reality of selfless, and they should practice the good of the knowledge of suffering, the good of the knowledge of origination, the good of the knowledge of cessation, the good of the knowledge of the path, the good of the knowledge of extinction, the good of the knowledge of nonproduction, the good of the knowledge of dharma, the good of the knowledge of subsequent realization, the good of the knowledge of the conventional, the good of the knowledge of mastery, the good of the knowledge in accord with sound, and the good of the knowledge of things as they really are. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the reality of the perfection of wisdom like that according to the reality and the mode.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if good and bad are not found in this deep perfection of wisdom, how can bodhisattva great beings practice this deep perfection of wisdom’s reality?”
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom’s reality should practice like this—namely, they should not practice with the idea ‘greed is good for me’ or ‘is bad for me’; they should not practice with the idea ‘hatred is good for me’ or ‘is bad for me’; they should not practice with the idea ‘confusion is good for me’ or ‘is bad for me’; they should not practice with the idea ‘greed, hatred,  and confusion are good for me’ or ‘are bad for me’; they should not practice with the idea ‘wrong view is good for me’ or ‘is bad for me’; up to they should not practice with the idea ‘all forms of view are good for me’ or ‘are bad for me.’ And why? Because the suchness of greed, hatred, and confusion does not do good to anything and does not do bad to anything, up to the suchness of the various views does not do good to anything and does not do bad to anything.
 “They should not practice with the idea ‘form is good for me’ or ‘form is bad for me’; up to ‘consciousness is good for me’ or ‘consciousness is bad for me’; similarly, connect this with each, up to they should not practice with the idea ‘awakening is good for me’ or ‘awakening is bad for me.’ And why? Subhūti, it is because the Tathāgata, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, does not apprehend anything that is good or bad. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, the true dharmic nature of dharmas, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, and the dharma-constituent remain. They do not do anything good or bad to anything. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should thus shun good and bad, and practice the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, why does the perfection of wisdom not do good and not do bad?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “it is because the perfection of wisdom does not cause any compounded or uncompounded dharma at all. It is because of that, Subhūti,  that the perfection of wisdom does not do good or bad to anything.”
 “But Lord, the uncompounded is good for all noble buddhas and a buddha’s śrāvakas, is it not?”
 “Subhūti, the uncompounded is indeed good for all noble buddhas and a buddha’s śrāvakas, but still, it is not there to be good or bad for anything. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, the suchness of space is not there to be good or bad for anything. Similarly, Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings is not there to be good or bad for anything.”
 “Lord, having trained in the uncompounded perfection of wisdom, do bodhisattva great beings not reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Having trained in the uncompounded perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva great beings gain the knowledge of all aspects, but not in a dualistic way.”
 “Lord, does a dual dharma reach a dual dharma?”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, does a nondual dharma reach a nondual dharma?”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Well then, Lord, does a dual dharma reach a nondual dharma?”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Well then, Lord, does a nondual dharma reach a dual dharma?”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Well then Lord, how is it reached?” 
 “Subhūti, because neither a dual dharma nor a nondual dharma  can be apprehended, the knowledge of all aspects is thus reached by way of not apprehending anything at all.” 
This was the sixty-third chapter, “Many Inquiries About the Two Dharmas,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 64: Perfectly Displayed
The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Deep, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom. Those who do what is difficult, Lord, are those bodhisattva great beings who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the sake of beings even though a being is not apprehended and the designation of a being is not apprehended. 
 “To illustrate, a person who wants to grow a cutting in space, where there is no firm ground—like that, Lord, is a bodhisattva great being who wants to reach the knowledge of all aspects for the sake of beings.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Those who do what is difficult are those bodhisattvas who set out for the knowledge of all aspects for the sake of beings and, having awakened to that knowledge of all aspects, liberate all beings from attachment. To illustrate, Subhūti, a person who wants to grow a cutting, without knowing its root, bud, leaf, and flower, still would grow a trunk from that cutting and, having grown it, tend and water it from time to time. Gradually there would be an abundance of branches from that trunk, there would be an abundance of leaves, there would be an abundance of flowers,  there would be an abundance of fruit, and they would make use of the leaves and so on. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the sake of all beings practice the six perfections, gain the knowledge of all aspects, and as leaves, flowers, and fruit, as it were, provide sustenance to all beings. Subhūti, there, having resorted to the bodhisattva leaf, as it were, beings are liberated from the three terrible forms of life; and, having resorted to the bodhisattva flower, as it were, beings take birth in great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, great sāla tree–like business families, and among the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to and take birth among the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana gods. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings gain the knowledge of all aspects and establish those beings in the result of stream enterer, establish them in the result of once-returner, establish them in the result of non-returner, establish them in the state of a worthy one, and establish them in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. They resort to those bodhisattva great beings, gain the knowledge of all aspects, and, having gained the knowledge of all aspects, as leaves, flowers, and fruit, as it were, also provide sustenance to all beings.
 “All those who give gifts for religious services performed to them will gradually pass into complete nirvāṇa in the three vehicles, namely the Śrāvaka Vehicle, or the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, or the Great Vehicle, and fully awaken to unsurpassed,  perfect, complete awakening, and even though a being is not apprehended and the designation of a being does not exist there, they liberate those beings from self-grasping.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of wisdom like that, thinking, ‘Here the beings or the designation of beings for the sake of whom I will gain the knowledge of all aspects cannot be apprehended at all.’ ” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings should indeed be known as tathāgatas. And why? Because thanks to bodhisattva great beings the continuums of all the hells are cut, of all the birthplaces of the animal world are cut, of all the worlds of Yama are cut, of all the places that preclude a perfect human birth are cut, the continuum of all destitution is cut, the continuums of all forms of life that are wanting are cut, the continuum of all the desire realm is cut, the continuum of all the form realm is cut, and the continuum of all the formless realm is cut.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Bodhisattva great beings should indeed be known as tathāgatas realized ones. And why? Subhūti, it is because if bodhisattva great beings were not to set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, past, future, and present lord buddhas would not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, pratyekabuddhas would not appear in the world, worthy ones would not appear in the world, up to stream enterers would not appear in the world, up to the continuum of hells would not be cut, up to the continuums of the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm would not be cut.
 “Again, Subhūti, what you have said, that ‘bodhisattva great beings should indeed be known as tathāgatas ,’ is exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Bodhisattva great beings should indeed be known as tathāgatas. And why? Subhūti, it is because that suchness, on account of which tathāgatas are labeled, is just the suchness on account of which pratyekabuddhas are labeled, is just the suchness on account of which all noble beings are labeled, is just the suchness on account of which form is labeled, up to is just the suchness on account of which consciousness is labeled, up to is just the suchness on account of which the compounded element and the uncompounded element are labeled, and is just the suchness on account of which the suchness of all beings and the suchness of the tathāgatas is labeled.
 “Why, Subhūti, is suchness called suchness? Standing in this suchness, bodhisattva great beings gain the knowledge of all aspects, therefore it is called suchness. In this way, Subhūti, having taken suchness as their authority, bodhisattva great beings should indeed be known as tathāgatas. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train like that in suchness, the perfection of wisdom. 
 “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings have trained thus in suchness, the perfection of the wisdom, they become skilled in the faculties of all beings and gain skill in the completion of the faculties. They understand that the work of all beings is their own responsibility. When they understand that the work of all beings is their own  responsibility, they complete knowledge from prayer. When they complete knowledge from prayer, they purify the knowledge of the three time periods; when they have cleansed the knowledge of the three time periods, they undertake the bodhisattva practices and work for the welfare of beings; when they work for the welfare of beings they purify a buddhafield; when they have purified a buddhafield, they gain the knowledge of all aspects; when they have gained the knowledge of all aspects, they turn the wheel of the Dharma; when they have turned the wheel of the Dharma, they establish beings in the three vehicles, and having established beings in the three vehicles, they will pass into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings seeing all the good qualities and benefits like that should produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and should inspire others to produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening as well.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras should bow down to those bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say!” replied the Lord. “Subhūti, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras should bow down to those bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom as it has been taught.”
 “Lord, how much merit do bodhisattva great beings create, who have produced the first thought, and who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening  for the sake of all beings?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord asked him in return, “Subhūti, were all the beings, as many as there are in a thousandfold world system, to be located on the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, would those beings create a lot of merit?”
 “A lot, Lord; a lot, Sugata,” he replied. “It would be infinite, Lord; beyond measure, Sugata.” 
 “Subhūti,” he continued, “of the two—the bases of meritorious action of beings, as many as there are included in a thousandfold world system, in the Śrāvaka Vehicle or in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the bases of meritorious action of one bodhisattva great being who has produced the first thought—the bases of meritorious action of those in the Śrāvaka Vehicle or in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle in a thousandfold world system does not approach the bases of meritorious action of one bodhisattva great being who has produced the first thought by a hundredth part, up to a hundred thousand one hundred millionth part. And why? Because those in the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles are born from bodhisattva great beings, but bodhisattva great beings are not born from śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas. Similarly, connect this with each, up to all those beings in the Śrāvaka Vehicle or in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle in a great billionfold world system do not approach even . . . , up to a hundred thousand one hundred millionth part of the merit of bodhisattva great beings who have produced the first thought. 
 “Subhūti, let alone beings in a great billionfold world system in the Śrāvaka Vehicle or in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, Subhūti, even if all the beings who are in the great billionfold world system were standing on the Śuklavipaśyanā level, their merit  would not approach even . . . , up to a hundred thousand one hundred millionth part of the merit of one bodhisattva great being who has produced the first thought. Subhūti, let alone those standing on the Śuklavipaśyanā level, Subhūti, even if all the beings included in the great billionfold world system were standing on the Gotra level, their merit would not approach even . . . , up to a hundred thousand one hundred millionth part of the merit of one bodhisattva great being who has produced the first thought. Similarly, connect this with each, up to the merit of those who have entered onto the Aṣṭamaka level, the Darśana level, the Tanū level, the Vītarāga level, the Kṛtāvin level, up to or the Pratyekabuddha level would not approach even . . . , up to a hundred thousand one hundred millionth part of the merit of one bodhisattva great being who has produced the first thought.
 “Subhūti, even if all the beings included in the great billionfold world system were to have entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva, their merit would not approach even . . . , up to a hundred thousand one hundred millionth part of the merit of bodhisattva great beings who are candidates for awakening. Subhūti, even if all the beings who are in the great billionfold world system were to be candidates for awakening, their merit would not approach even . . . , up to a hundred thousand one hundred millionth part of the merit of a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha.”
 “Lord, what should bodhisattva great beings who have produced the first thought pay attention to?” he asked.
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “bodhisattva great beings who have produced the first thought should pay attention to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Lord,  what sort of thing is the knowledge of all aspects—what is the objective support, what is the dominant factor, what is the aspect, and what is the defining mark?”
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “the knowledge of all aspects is a nonexistent thing that is without a defining mark, without a causal sign, without effort, unproduced, and not appearing. As for what you asked, Subhūti—‘What is the objective support of the knowledge of all aspects, what is the dominant factor, what is the aspect, and what is the defining mark?’—Subhūti, the objective support of the knowledge of all aspects is a nonexistent thing; the dominant factor is mindfulness; the aspect is calmness; and the defining mark is the absence of a defining mark. Subhūti, that is the objective support of the knowledge of all aspects, that is the dominant factor, that is the aspect, and that is the defining mark.” 
 He then inquired further, “Lord, is only the knowledge of all aspects a nonexistent thing, or is form also a nonexistent thing? Are feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness also nonexistent things? Similarly, are inner and outer dharmas also nonexistent things? And are the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization; the eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; great love, great compassion, great joy,  and great equanimity; the first clairvoyance, and the second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth clairvoyance; and the compounded element and uncompounded element also nonexistent things?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “the knowledge of all aspects is a nonexistent thing; form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are also nonexistent things; up to the compounded element and uncompounded element are also nonexistent things. And why? Subhūti, that knowledge of all aspects has no intrinsic nature.”
 “Lord, why does the knowledge of all aspects have no intrinsic nature?” he asked.
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “something that has arisen from a union has no intrinsic nature, and anything arisen from a union with no intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Subhūti, in this way all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Subhūti, all phenomena also have emptiness for their intrinsic nature, and all phenomena have signlessness and wishlessness for their intrinsic nature. Subhūti, all phenomena also have suchness for their intrinsic nature, all phenomena have the very limit of reality for their intrinsic nature, and all phenomena have the dharma-constituent for their intrinsic nature. Subhūti, also from just this explanation, you should know that all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then inquired further of him, “Lord, if all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, with what skillful means do bodhisattva great beings who have produced the first thought of awakening practice the perfection of giving, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity? How do they practice the perfection of morality, perfection  of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom, from the first concentration, up to the fourth concentration; from love, up to equanimity; from absorption in the station of endless space, up to the station of neither perception nor nonperception; from inner emptiness, up to the emptiness of its own mark; and from the applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path, emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization, eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, great compassion, and knowledge of all aspects, and purify a buddhafield and bring beings to maturity?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “you should know that the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings is mastering all phenomena that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, purifying a buddhafield, and bringing beings to maturity, all the while knowing that the buddhafield as well as those beings are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Practicing the perfection of giving, those bodhisattva great beings master the awakening path; practicing the perfection of morality they master the awakening path; practicing the perfection of patience they master the awakening path; practicing the perfection of perseverance they master the awakening path;  practicing the perfection of concentration they master the awakening path; and practicing the perfection of wisdom they master the awakening path; similarly, connect this with each, up to and practicing the knowledge of all aspects they master the awakening path. But they should understand that the awakening path is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature too. 
 “Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections keep on mastering that awakening path for as long as they are not fully endowed with the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, great compassion, and the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. Subhūti, these are the awakening path. They complete the perfections with these awakening paths, and having completed the perfections gain the knowledge of all aspects through the wisdom of the single unique instant. At that time they eliminate all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions through an elimination in which states of existence are not produced. As they look down with the buddha eye they do not even apprehend the great billionfold world system as a nonexistent thing, let alone as an existent thing. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of wisdom like that, where all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Subhūti, that too is the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings—that they do not apprehend something that exists, never mind something that does not exist.
 “Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom give gifts. When they give a gift, they do not think about it in a certain way, making it into a causal sign, and they do not pay attention to it as an existent thing or as a nonexistent thing.  They do not think about recipients in a certain way and make them into a causal sign, and do not pay attention to them as an existent thing or as a nonexistent thing. They do not think about givers in a certain way and make them into a causal sign, and do not pay attention to them as an existent thing or as a nonexistent thing. They also do not apprehend that thought of awakening, do not make it into a causal sign, do not make it into an objective support, and do not see it. They do not think about . . . , up to the perfection of wisdom in a certain way as an existent thing or as a nonexistent thing and do not make it into a causal sign. They do not pay attention to . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects as an existent thing or as a nonexistent thing, do not think about it in a certain way, and do not pay attention to it. They do not make . . . , up to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening into an objective support, and do not make it into a causal sign. They also do not perceive one who becomes fully awakened, or something by means of which one becomes fully awakened as an existent thing or as a nonexistent thing. And why? Because all phenomena thus are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and that nonexistence has not been made by buddhas, śrāvakas, or pratyekabuddhas. All phenomena are unchanging and are separated from a maker.”
 “Lord, are phenomena separated from the phenomena themselves?” he asked.
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “The phenomena are separated from the phenomena themselves.”
 “Lord,” he asked further, “if the phenomena themselves are separated from the phenomena, how is it appropriate that a separated phenomenon knows a separated phenomenon as an existent thing or a nonexistent thing? It is not appropriate that a nonexistent phenomenon knows an existent phenomenon; it is not appropriate that an existent phenomenon knows a nonexistent phenomenon; it is not appropriate that a nonexistent phenomenon knows a nonexistent phenomenon; and it is not appropriate that an existent phenomenon  knows an existent phenomenon. So, in regard to all phenomena that are thus unknown, however could bodhisattva great beings be teaching that they are ‘nonexistent things’ or ‘existent things’?” 
 “Bodhisattva great beings teach that they are ‘a nonexistent thing’ or ‘an existent thing’ based on ordinary convention, but not ultimately.”
 “Lord, is ordinary convention one thing and the ultimate another?” he asked.
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “ordinary convention is not one thing and the ultimate another. Just that suchness of ordinary convention is the suchness of the ultimate. These beings do not know and see that suchness, which is why ‘an existent thing’ or ‘a nonexistent thing’ are taught as the bodhisattvas’ ordinary convention.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, these beings have the notion that these five aggregates are existent things. They are unaware that they are nonexistent things. So, thinking, ‘What can I do so they will realize they are nonexistent things?’, bodhisattva great beings teach like that for their sake, based on a division of dharmas. Subhūti, they should practice the perfection of wisdom like that.”
This was the sixty-fourth chapter, “Perfectly Displayed,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 65: Worshiping, Serving, and Attending on Spiritual Friends as Skillful Means
The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, you say ‘bodhisattva’s practice’ again and again. Lord, what are the words bodhisattva’s practice for?” 
 “Subhūti, a ‘bodhisattva’s practice’ is a practice practiced for bodhi, therefore it is called a bodhisattva’s practice.” 
 “Lord, where is that practice—that bodhisattva great beings’ practice practiced for awakening?” 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “they practice ‘form is empty,’ but pursue the practice without dividing awakening into two. They practice ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is empty’; and similarly, they practice ‘the constituents . . . ,’ ‘the sense fields . . . ,’ and ‘inner and outer dharmas are empty’; they practice ‘the perfection of giving . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of morality . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of patience . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of perseverance . . . ,’ ‘the perfection of concentration . . . ,’ and ‘the perfection of wisdom is empty’; they practice ‘inner emptiness is empty’; they practice ‘outer emptiness . . . ,’ ‘inner and outer emptiness is empty,’ and similarly, connect this with each, up to they practice ‘the emptiness of its own mark is empty’; they practice ‘the first, second, third, and fourth concentration . . . ,’ ‘love . . . ,’ ‘compassion . . . ,’ ‘joy . . . ,’ and ‘equanimity is empty’; they practice ‘the station of endless space . . . ,’ ‘the station of endless consciousness . . . ,’ ‘the station of nothing-at-all . . . ,’ and ‘the station of neither perception nor nonperception is empty’; they practice ‘the four applications of mindfulness are empty,’ they practice ‘the four right efforts are empty,’ they practice ‘the four legs of miraculous power are empty,’ they practice ‘the five faculties are empty,’ they practice ‘the five powers are empty,’ they practice ‘the seven limbs of awakening are empty,’ and they practice ‘the eightfold noble path is empty’; they practice ‘the emptiness, signless, and wishless gateways to liberation . . . ,’ ‘the absorptions . . . ,’ ‘the ten tathāgata powers . . . ,’ ‘the four fearlessnesses . . . ,’ ‘the four detailed and thorough knowledges . . . ,’ ‘the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha . . . ,’ and ‘the purification of a buddhafield is empty’; they practice ‘bringing beings to maturity is empty’; they practice ‘the confidences are empty’; they practice ‘accomplishing the letters  is empty’; they practice ‘entrance into all letters is empty’; they practice ‘entrance into all for which there are no letters is empty’; they practice ‘the compounded element is empty’; and they practice ‘the uncompounded element is empty,’ but pursue the practice without dividing awakening into two. Subhūti, when practicing the perfection of wisdom like that bodhisattva great beings’ lives are lived for awakening.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, you say ‘buddha’ again and again. Lord, what is the word buddha for?”
 “Subhūti, true reality is called buddha. Also, Subhūti, there are those who have fully awakened to the true Dharma, therefore they are called buddha. Also, Subhūti, there are those who have a penetrating realization of true reality, therefore they are called buddha. Also, Subhūti, there are those who have fully awakened to all dharmas as they really are, therefore they are called buddha.”
 “Lord, you say ‘awakening’ again and again. Lord, what is the word awakening for?”
 “Subhūti, awakening is a word for emptiness, it is a word for suchness, it is a word for perfect, it is a word for the very limit of reality, and it is a word for dharma-constituent. Also, Subhūti, awakening is a word for mere designation. Also, Subhūti, awakening means true reality. Also, Subhūti, awakening is suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, and unaltered nature, therefore it is called awakening. Also, Subhūti, that awakening is a realization that all dharmas are a mere designation and causal sign, therefore it is called awakening. Also,  Subhūti, that awakening is the awakening of the lord buddhas, therefore it is called awakening. Also, Subhūti, the lord buddhas have fully awakened to it, therefore it is called awakening.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings who practice for this awakening practice the six perfections, up to practice the knowledge of all aspects, what wholesome root of theirs will be accumulated or diminished, decreased or increased, produced or stopped, or defiled or purified?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who practice for this awakening, practice the six perfections, up to and practice the knowledge of all aspects do not practice to accumulate or to diminish, to decrease or to increase, to produce or to stop, or to defile or purify any dharma at all. And why? Because the awakening of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom is not available in the manner of an objective support that has to be accumulated or diminished, has to be decreased or increased, has to be produced or stopped, or has to be defiled or purified.”
 “Lord, if the awakening of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom is not available as any dharma in the manner of an objective support, how will bodhisattva great beings  practicing the perfection of wisdom fully grasp the perfection of giving, and similarly, up to and fully grasp the perfection of wisdom; how will they practice inner emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; how will they practice the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions; how will they practice the four applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path; how will they practice the emptiness, signless, and wishless gateways to liberation; up to how will they practice the ten tathāgata powers; up to practice great compassion; and how will they practice the ten bodhisattva levels, transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels, and enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva?”
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings undertake the bodhisattva practices they do not practice the perfection of giving in a dualistic way, and similarly, connect this with each, up to they do not practice the perfection of wisdom in a dualistic way, up to and they do not practice the knowledge of all aspects in a dualistic way. In that way, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they fully grasp the perfection of giving, up to they fully grasp the perfection of wisdom, up to and they gain the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 “Lord, if they do not practice the perfection of giving in a dualistic way, and similarly, up to do not practice the knowledge of all aspects in a dualistic way, how will the bodhisattva great beings, starting from the production of the first thought,  grow and flourish on wholesome roots, and how will they grow and flourish on wholesome roots up to the production of the last thought?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, those who practice dualistically do not grow and flourish on wholesome roots. And why? Subhūti, those who resort to dualism are all foolish ordinary people. They do not grow and flourish on wholesome roots. The bodhisattva great beings who do not practice dualistically, starting from the production of the first thought, grow and flourish on account of the wholesome dharmas, and up to the last thought they grow and flourish on account of the wholesome dharmas. The world with its gods, humans, and asuras cannot suppress those wholesome roots of theirs. Were those unwholesome roots to suppress them they would fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level, and they would be captured by other unwholesome roots as well. Captured by those, even while practicing the perfection of giving they would not grow and flourish on wholesome roots, up to while practicing the knowledge of all aspects they would not grow and flourish on wholesome roots. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of wisdom like that.”
 “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of wholesome roots?” he asked.
 “Subhūti, they do not. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of wholesome roots, and of course they do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of unwholesome roots, but still bodhisattva great beings who have not attended on the lord buddhas, or have not brought the wholesome roots to completion,  or have not been assisted by spiritual friends cannot gain the knowledge of all aspects.” 
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings who have attended on the lord buddhas, have brought the wholesome roots to completion, and have been assisted by spiritual friends gain the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “here, starting from the production of the first thought, bodhisattva great beings attend on the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, fully grasp whatever teachings there are of those lord buddhas—the discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, verses, summaries, introductions, tales, accounts, birth stories, expanded texts, marvels, and expositions—and, having taken them up, thoroughly mastered the words, investigated them with their thinking minds, and penetrated them with insight, acquire the dhāraṇī. Having acquired the dhāraṇī, they engender detailed and thorough knowledge. Having produced detailed and thorough knowledge, even after departing that life, up until gaining the knowledge of all aspects, they do not ever let those doctrines get lost. There they plant wholesome roots in relation to those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, and, protected by those wholesome roots, never take birth in the terrible forms of life or in places that preclude a perfect human birth. With those wholesome roots they protect the purity of aspiration, an aspiration that causes purification of a buddhafield and causes beings to be brought to maturity.  Protected by those wholesome roots, they are never separated from those spiritual friends, lord buddhas, bodhisattva great beings, and śrāvakas who sing the praises of the Buddha Vehicle. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that should thus attend on the lord buddhas, look after the wholesome roots, and rely on spiritual friends.”
This was the sixty-fifth chapter, “Worshiping, Serving, and Attending on Spiritual Friends as Skillful Means,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 66: A Demonstration of Skillful Means
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings who do not attend on the lord buddhas, do not plant wholesome roots, and are not looked after by spiritual friends—those bodhisattva great beings would not gain the knowledge of all aspects, would they?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings who have not attended on the lord buddhas, have not planted wholesome roots, and have not been looked after by spiritual friends would not gain the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Even bodhisattva great beings who have attended on the lord buddhas, have planted wholesome roots, and have been looked after by spiritual friends will not be able to gain the knowledge of all aspects, never mind bodhisattva great beings who have not attended on the lord buddhas, have not planted wholesome roots, and have not been looked after by spiritual friends. It is impossible that they will gain the knowledge of all aspects. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings  should attend on the lord buddhas, plant wholesome roots, and rely on spiritual friends.”
 “Lord, why would even bodhisattva great beings who attend on the lord buddhas, plant wholesome roots, and rely on spiritual friends not gain the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “It is because of being separated from skillful means. It is because they have not heard that method from those lord buddhas and have not planted wholesome roots and not relied on those spiritual friends who are the spiritual friends that would teach them that method.”
 “Lord, what are those skillful means, in possession of which bodhisattva great beings gain the knowledge of all aspects?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here, starting from the production of the first thought, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of giving they give gifts to the lord buddhas, the pratyekabuddhas and śrāvakas, and to those in human form and nonhuman form, with attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects. But, endowed with attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects, they do not entertain the notion that giving is giving, do not entertain the notion that the recipient is a recipient, and do not entertain the notion that the giver is a giver. And why? Because they see all dharmas as empty of their own mark, as not thoroughly established, and as not having come into being. They enter into the mark that marks all dharmas as dharmas, entering into all dharmas marked as being without the capacity to function and not occasioning anything.  Endowed with those skillful means they grow and flourish on wholesome roots; growing and flourishing on wholesome roots, they practice the perfection of giving; and practicing the perfection of giving they bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield, but without hoping for a result from giving—a result from giving that they would enjoy in saṃsāra. On the contrary, they practice the perfection of giving in order to protect beings and in order to liberate beings.”
This was the sixty-sixth chapter, “A Demonstration of Skillful Means,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 67: Morality
“Furthermore, Subhūti, starting from the production of the first thought, bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of morality with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects guard morality. They do not obscure it with a greedy thought, or hate, or confusion, or a bad proclivity, or an obsession, or any unwholesome dharma at all that obstructs awakening—namely, with miserliness, immorality, an emotionally upsetting thought, a lazy thought, deficient thought, thought that veers off, an intellectually confused thought, pride, conceit, pride in being superior, egotism, or a śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha thought. And why? Because they understand that all dharmas are empty of their own mark; they see all dharmas as not arisen, not thoroughly established, and as not having come into being; and they enter into the mark that marks all dharmas as dharmas, entering into all dharmas marked as being without the capacity to function and not occasioning anything. Endowed with those skillful means they grow and flourish on wholesome roots. Growing and flourishing  on wholesome roots, they practice the perfection of morality. Practicing the perfection of morality, they bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield, but without hoping for a result from morality—a result from morality that they would enjoy in saṃsāra. On the contrary, they practice the perfection of morality because they want to look after beings, to avoid hurting beings, and to benefit beings.” 
This was the sixty-seventh chapter, “Morality,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 68: Growing and Flourishing
Similarly, connect this with the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, and the perfection of concentration as well.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, starting from the production of the first thought, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects cultivate wisdom. They do not obscure it with a greedy thought, up to a śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha thought. And why? Subhūti, it is because they understand all dharmas are empty of their own mark; they see all dharmas as not arisen, as not thoroughly established, and as not having come into being; and they enter into the mark that marks all dharmas as dharmas, entering into all dharmas marked as being without the capacity to function and not occasioning anything. Endowed with those skillful means, they grow and flourish on wholesome roots. Growing and flourishing on wholesome roots, they practice the perfection of wisdom. Practicing the perfection of wisdom, they bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield, but without hoping for a result from wisdom—a result from wisdom that they would enjoy in saṃsāra. On the contrary, they practice  the perfection of giving in order to protect beings and in order to liberate beings.” 
This was the sixty-eighth chapter, “Growing and Flourishing,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 69: An Explanation of Meditation on the Path
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings become absorbed in the first concentration, up to become absorbed in the fourth concentration, become absorbed in the immeasurables, up to and become absorbed in the formless absorptions, but they do not get saddled with their maturation. And why? Because they are endowed with skillful means, those skillful means endowed with which they understand that the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions are empty of their own mark, up to understand that they do not occasion anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, even though, starting from the production of the first thought, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom endowed with skillful means travel the path to eliminate what seeing and meditation eliminate, it does not cause them to reach the result of stream enterer, and it does not cause them to reach the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one. And why? Because, even while practicing the dharmas on the side of awakening, they understand that all dharmas are empty of their own mark and pass beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha level. Subhūti, this is the bodhisattva great beings’ forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom become absorbed in the eight deliverances, and become absorbed in the nine serial absorptions, but do not reach the result of stream enterer, up to do not reach the state of a worthy one. And why? Because they understand all dharmas  are empty of their own mark, up to and they understand that all dharmas do not occasion anything.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings master the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and great compassion, but still they do not reach the knowledge of all aspects until they have purified a buddhafield and brought beings to maturity. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of wisdom like that.” 
The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings who practice the deep dharmas like that but do not get saddled with their maturation are endowed with the finest awareness.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who practice the deep dharmas like that but do not get saddled with their maturation are endowed with the finest awareness. And why? Subhūti, it is because the bodhisattva great beings do not move from their intrinsic nature.”
 “Lord, from which intrinsic nature do they not move?”
 “Subhūti, they do not move from a nonexistent thing. In regard to what you have said, Subhūti—‘From which intrinsic nature do they not move?’—they do not move from the intrinsic nature of form; they do not move from the intrinsic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; they do not move from the intrinsic nature of the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience,  perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; they do not move from the intrinsic nature of the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions; they do not move from the intrinsic nature of the applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path; up to and they do not move from the intrinsic nature of the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization, and great compassion. And why? Subhūti, it is because the intrinsic nature of these dharmas is a nonexistent thing. Subhūti, a nonexistent thing cannot fully awaken to a nonexistent thing.”
 “Lord, can a nonexistent thing fully awaken to an existent thing?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Lord, can an existent thing fully awaken to a nonexistent thing?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Lord, can a nonexistent thing fully awaken to a nonexistent thing?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Lord, can an existent thing fully awaken to an existent thing?”
 “No, Subhūti.” 
 “Lord, if a nonexistent thing does not fully awaken to an existent thing, an existent thing does not fully awaken to a nonexistent thing, a nonexistent thing does not fully awaken to a nonexistent thing, and an existent thing does not fully awaken to an existent thing, well then, wouldn’t there be no attainment and no full awakening?”
 “Subhūti, there is indeed a clear realization, but it is not through this set of four productions.” 
 “So then, Lord, what sort of thing is clear realization?”
 “Seeing sameness, not like an existent thing and not like a nonexistent thing either, is clear realization because it is without thought construction; it is free from thought construction. Clear realization is that sort of thing, where those thought constructions do not exist.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction?”
 “Subhūti, ‘form is permanent’ and ‘impermanent’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction; ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is permanent’ and ‘impermanent’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction. ‘Form is happiness’ and ‘suffering’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction; ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is happiness’ and ‘suffering’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction. ‘Form has a self’ and ‘is selfless’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction; ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness has a self’ and ‘is selfless’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction. ‘Form is calm’ and ‘not calm’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction; ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is calm’ and ‘not calm’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction. ‘Form has to be comprehended’ and ‘does not have to be comprehended’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction; ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness has to be comprehended’ and ‘does not have to be comprehended’ is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction. ‘The noble truth of suffering has to be comprehended’ is thought construction; ‘origination has to be abandoned’ is thought construction; ‘cessation has to be actualized’  is thought construction; ‘the path has to be cultivated’ is thought construction; ‘the four concentrations have to be cultivated’ is thought construction; ‘the four immeasurables have to be cultivated’ is thought construction; ‘the four formless absorptions have to be cultivated’ is thought construction; ‘the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path have to be cultivated’ is thought construction; ‘the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation have to be cultivated’ is thought construction; ‘the eight deliverances and nine serial absorptions have to be cultivated’ is thought construction; ‘I must pass beyond the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening’ is thought construction; ‘I must complete the ten bodhisattva levels’ is thought construction; ‘I must enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva’ is thought construction; ‘I must purify a buddhafield’ is thought construction; ‘I must bring beings to maturity’ is thought construction; ‘I must generate the ten tathāgata powers’ is thought construction; ‘I must complete the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha’ is thought construction; ‘I must gain the knowledge of all aspects’ is thought construction; and ‘I must eliminate all residual impression connections’ is thought construction. 
 “Therefore, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not construct in thought what should not be constructed in thought. They do not construct in thought ‘form is permanent or impermanent’ that should not be constructed in thought; they do not construct in thought ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness is permanent or impermanent’  that should not be constructed in thought; they do not construct in thought . . . , up to ‘I must gain the knowledge of all aspects’ that should not be constructed in thought. And why? Because something real does not concoct something unreal and something unreal does not concoct something real, and you cannot apprehend, apart from something real and unreal, something doing the concocting, something being concocted, someone who does the concocting, and somewhere the concocting happens. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti, form, up to the knowledge of all aspects is without thought construction, up to awakening is without thought construction. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should thus practice the perfection of wisdom without thought construction.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom see all dharmas without thought construction?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, there is no intrinsic nature of form, up to consciousness, up to there is no intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects. That which has no intrinsic nature is without thought construction. For that reason, Subhūti, form . . . , up to consciousness is without thought construction. Similarly, connect this with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects is without thought construction. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if no phenomenon at all can be apprehended as having an intrinsic nature, on what path do bodhisattva great beings enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva—on the śrāvaka path, or the pratyekabuddha path, or the buddha path?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him,  “Indeed, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva on the śrāvaka path, or the pratyekabuddha path, or the buddha path, but still, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva having trained on all paths. To illustrate, Subhūti, worthy ones do indeed enter into the flawlessness that is a perfect state, having trained on all the paths, but still, until they have produced the path’s result they will not reach the result of a worthy one in a single instant of the path. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings also do indeed enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva having produced all the paths, but still, until they have reached the vajropama meditative stabilization they will not reach the knowledge of all aspects, because they gain the knowledge of all aspects through the wisdom of the unique single instant.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti inquired of him, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva having completed all paths, in that case, Lord, given that the Aṣṭamaka path is different, the stream enterer path is different, the path of the candidate for once-returner is different, the once-returner path is different, the path of the candidate for non-returner is different, the non-returner path is different, the path of the candidate for worthy one is different, the worthy one path is different, the pratyekabuddha path is different, and the path of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha is different, well then, Lord, if all those paths are different from each other, how will bodhisattva great beings enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva  having completed all paths? Lord, if bodhisattva great beings have to complete all paths to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, would they not, having produced all paths, be an Aṣṭamaka; would they not, having produced the path of seeing, be a stream enterer; would they not, having produced the path of meditation, be a candidate for once-returner and a once returner; up to would they not be a worthy one; and would they not, having produced the pratyekabuddha path, be a pratyekabuddha? Lord, there is no chance, it is impossible that bodhisattva great beings, having produced the Aṣṭamaka path, are an Aṣṭamaka, or, having become an Aṣṭamaka enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva; it is impossible for bodhisattva great beings to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva and reach the knowledge of all aspects. Similarly, it is impossible that bodhisattva great beings, having reached the result of stream enterer, up to having reached the state of a worthy one or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva; it is impossible for bodhisattva great beings to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva and reach the knowledge of all aspects. Given that it would be impossible for bodhisattva great beings to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva and reach the knowledge of all aspects, how, Lord, are we to understand bodhisattva great beings entering into the secure state of a bodhisattva having completed all paths, and having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva reaching the knowledge of all aspects and eliminating all residual impression connections?”
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Subhūti, it is impossible for bodhisattva great beings to become an Aṣṭamaka,  to reach the result of stream enterer, and having produced all paths, ‘enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva.’ There is no chance of it happening, it is impossible. It is impossible that ‘bodhisattva great beings enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva and gain the knowledge of all aspects.’ But still, Subhūti, starting from the production of the first thought, bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections, having beheld all eight levels, pass beyond them with knowledge and seeing. What are the eight levels? The exposition of the levels is this: namely, the Śuklavipaśyanā level, the Gotra level, the Aṣṭamaka level, the Darśana level, the Tanū level, the Vītarāga level, the Kṛtāvin level, and the Pratyekabuddha level. Having passed beyond those eight levels with knowledge and seeing, they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva. Having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva with the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, they eliminate all afflictions, residual impressions, and connections. 
 “There, Subhūti, the knowledge of an Aṣṭamaka is a bodhisattva’s forbearance; the knowledge and abandonment of a stream enterer is a bodhisattva’s forbearance; the knowledge and abandonment of a once-returner is a bodhisattva’s forbearance; the knowledge and abandonment of a non-returner is a bodhisattva’s forbearance; the knowledge and abandonment of a worthy one is a bodhisattva’s forbearance; and the knowledge and abandonment of a pratyekabuddha is a bodhisattva’s forbearance. Having completed all those paths of all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva with the knowledge of a knower of path aspects, and having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva, eliminate all afflictions, residual impressions,  and connections with the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings having completed all the paths should fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, should be like fruit for all beings to live on.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, which of these paths—the śrāvaka path, the pratyekabuddha path, and the buddha path—that the Lord has spoken about is this path of a knower of path aspects?”
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “on that bodhisattva great beings should produce a completely pure knowledge of path aspects. Subhūti, there a completely pure knowledge of path aspects is this: Whatever the attributes, whatever the reasons, and whatever the signs through which the knowledge of path aspects becomes completely pure, bodhisattva great beings should fully awaken to those attributes, those tokens, and those signs. And, having fully awakened to them, in order to tame others they should also explain, expound, explicate, and make them known to others, and should establish others in them so that, one way or the other, others will understand. On that bodhisattva great beings should accomplish vocalizations, conventional terms, and sounds with a pronunciation that makes them understood in the great billionfold world system, and they should accomplish those vocalizations, conventional terms, and sounds in order to make an echo-like understanding. So, Subhūti, in this one of many ways, bodhisattva great beings should complete the knowledge of path aspects. Having completed the knowledge of path aspects they should know the aspirations of beings. They should also know the path of beings in hell,  and they should know the cause and should know the result as well. They should cause them to turn back from the path to the hells, and they should cause them to turn back from the cause and should cause them to turn back from the result as well. Similarly, they should also know the path of the kinnaras, mahoragas, nāgas, yakṣas, and humans, and they should know the cause and should know the result as well. They should also know the path of the gods, and they should know the cause and should know the result as well. They should also know the path of Brahmā, and they should know the cause and should know the result as well. They should also know the path of the Ābhāsvara, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, Asaṃjñin, Avṛha, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha gods, and they should know the cause and should know the result as well. They should also know the path of the Ākāśānantyāyatana gods, and they should know the cause and should know the result as well, up to they should also know the path of the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana gods, and they should know the cause and should know the result as well. They should know the four applications of mindfulness, should know the four right efforts, should know the four legs of miraculous power, should know the five faculties, should know the five powers, should know the seven limbs of awakening, and they should know the eightfold noble path. They should know the emptiness gateway to liberation, should know the signlessness gateway to liberation, and should know the wishlessness gateway to liberation. They should know the ten tathāgata powers, should know the four fearlessnesses, should know the four detailed and thorough knowledges, should know the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and should know great compassion. They establish by way of those paths the beings who should be established in the result of stream enterer  in the result of stream enterer, up to establish those who should be established in the state of a worthy one in the state of a worthy one, and establish those who should be established in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. They establish those who should be established in awakening in awakening. This, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of path aspects. 
 “Having trained in this, bodhisattva great beings can become involved in the aspirations of beings. Having become involved in their aspirations, they can teach the doctrine in such a way that one way or the other their doctrine-teachings do not get lost and are not in vain. And why? It is because they have a perfectly proportionate, perfect comprehension that knows the higher and lower faculties of others, and they know the goings and comings and deaths and rebirths of beings as they actually are. 
 “Subhūti, those dharmas on the side of awakening in which bodhisattva great beings should train, and the paths in which the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas should train, are all included within this perfection of wisdom, so bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if those dharmas—the dharmas on the side of awakening and the awakening—are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—namely, no mark—how, Lord, will the dharmas on the side of awakening be those that bring about awakening? Lord, dharmas that are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—namely, no mark—do not bring about or take away any dharma  at all. To illustrate, Lord, space does not bring about and does not take away any dharma. Similarly, Lord, all dharmas are empty of their own marks and do not bring about and do not take away any dharma at all.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” he replied. “Subhūti, dharmas empty of their own marks do not bring about or take away any dharma at all. Subhūti, the teaching that ‘the dharmas on the side of awakening bring about awakening’ is for those beings who do not know that dharmas are empty of their own marks. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; the perfection of giving, up to the perfection of wisdom; inner emptiness, outer emptiness, up to the emptiness of its own mark; the first concentration, up to the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana absorption; the applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path; the three gateways to liberation, the eight deliverances, the nine serial absorptions, up to the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; great compassion; up to the knowledge of all aspects—all those dharmas in the noble Dharma and Vinaya—are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—namely, no mark. The Tathāgata, in order to take care of all beings,  uses them as labeled by ordinary convention: conventionally, but not ultimately. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train in them all by knowing and seeing them. Having trained in them as they really are by knowing and seeing them, they should realize some and not realize others.” 
 “Lord, what are the dharmas bodhisattva great beings should realize, having trained in them by knowing and seeing, and what are the dharmas they should not realize?”
 “Subhūti, they are not those that śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas have to realize by knowing and seeing. They are all dharmas that have to be fully realized with the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings should train in this noble Dharma and Vinaya perfection of wisdom.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, you say ‘noble Dharma and Vinaya’ again and again. Lord, what is the noble Dharma and Vinaya? Lord, to what extent does one say something is ‘the noble Dharma and Vinaya’?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from greed, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from hatred, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from confusion, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from the view of the perishable collection, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from doubt, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from grasping rules and rituals as absolute,  are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from attachment to sense objects, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from malice, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from attachment to forms, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from attachment to formless states, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from ignorance, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from gross mental excitement, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from the first concentration, up to are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from the fourth concentration, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from love, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from compassion, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from joy, are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from equanimity, up to and are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from the station of neither perception nor nonperception. They are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from the compounded element or the uncompounded element. 
 “And why? Because all those dharmas are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—namely, no mark. Those that are formless are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from the formless. Those that cannot be pointed out are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from ones that cannot be pointed out. Those that do not obstruct are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from ones that do not obstruct. Those that have only one mark are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from ones that have only one mark; and those that have no mark are not conjoined with and are not disjoined from ones that have no mark. Subhūti, thus this perfection of wisdom of the bodhisattva great beings in which bodhisattva great beings have to train has only one mark—namely, no mark.  It is formless, cannot be pointed out, and does not obstruct, and while training in it they do not apprehend a mark of any dharma at all.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, they should not train in the mark of form, and they should not train in the mark of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; they should not train in the mark of the eyes, and they should not train in the mark of the ears, nose, tongue, body, or thinking mind; they should not train in the mark of a form, and they should not train in the mark of a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, or dharmas; they should not train in the mark of the earth element, and they should not train in the mark of the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, or consciousness element; they should not train in the mark of the perfection of giving, and they should not train in the mark of the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom; they should not train in the mark of inner emptiness, up to and they should not train in the mark of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; they should not train in the mark of the first concentration, up to and they should not train in the mark of the fourth concentration; they should not train in the mark of love, and they should not train in the mark of compassion, joy, or equanimity; they should not train in the mark of the station of endless space, up to and they should not train in the mark of the station of neither perception nor nonperception; they should not train in the mark of the four applications of mindfulness, up to and they should not train in the mark of the eightfold noble path; they should not train in the mark of the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, or wishlessness meditative stabilization; they should not train in the mark of the absorptions  in the gateways to liberation; they should not train in the mark of the ten tathāgata powers, they should not train in the mark of the four fearlessnesses, they should not train in the mark of the four detailed and thorough knowledges, they should not train in the mark of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and they should not train in the mark of great compassion; they should not train in the mark of the truth of suffering, and they should not train in the mark of the truth of origination, cessation, or noble path; they should not train in the mark of dependent origination in the order in which it unfolds and in the order in which it does not unfold; they should not train in the mark of the compounded element, and they should not train in the mark of the uncompounded element? Lord, if they should not train in the marks of those dharmas, and should not train in the mark of the compounded, how, Lord, without having trained in the mark of dharmas and the mark of volitional factors will a bodhisattva great being transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels? How, even without having transcended the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels, will they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva? How, even without having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva, will they gain the knowledge of all aspects? How, even without having gained the knowledge of all aspects, will they turn the wheel of the Dharma? And how, even without having turned the wheel of the Dharma, will they release beings in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, or in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, or in the Great Vehicle from saṃsāra?”
Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, were there to be a mark of any dharma, bodhisattva great beings would have to train in that mark. But, Subhūti, because all dharmas have no mark, are formless,  cannot be pointed out, and do not obstruct, and thus have only one mark—namely, no mark—therefore bodhisattva great beings should not train in those marks; they should not even train in the unmarked. And why? Subhūti, it is not because those earlier with marks later become unmarked. It is because, even earlier, Subhūti, they were unmarked and now, too, they are unmarked, so bodhisattva great beings should therefore not train in marks, and should not train in the unmarked either. And why? Subhūti, it is because whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, the element of marks simply remains.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti further inquired of him, “Lord, if all dharmas are unmarked, do not have various marks, and do not have even one mark, how, Lord, will bodhisattva great beings meditate on the perfection of wisdom? Lord, without meditating on the perfection of wisdom bodhisattva great beings will not be able to transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels. Without having transcended the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels, bodhisattva great beings also will not be able to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and without having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva great being, also will not be able to produce forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas. Without having produced forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas, they will not be able to produce clairvoyance, and without having produced clairvoyance, bodhisattva great beings will not be able to purify a buddhafield and bring beings to maturity.  Without having purified a buddhafield and brought beings to maturity, bodhisattva great beings will not be able to gain the knowledge of all aspects, and without having gained the knowledge of all aspects, they will not be able to turn the wheel of the Dharma. Without having turned the wheel of the Dharma, they will not be able to establish beings in the result of stream enterer, will not be able to establish beings in the result of once-returner, will not be able to establish beings in the result of non-returner, will not be able to establish beings in the state of a worthy one, will not be able to establish beings in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and will not be able to establish beings in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They will not be able to establish beings in the bases of meritorious action arisen from giving, will not be able to establish beings in the bases of meritorious action arisen from morality, and will not be able to establish beings in the bases of meritorious action arisen from meditation.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Subhūti, all dharmas are unmarked, do not have various marks, and do not have even one mark, so, Subhūti, meditation on the unmarked is meditation on the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom.”
 “Lord, in what way is meditation on the unmarked, meditation on the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Subhūti, the disintegration of meditation on all dharmas is meditation on the perfection of wisdom.”
 “Lord, how is the disintegration of meditation on all dharmas, meditation on the perfection of wisdom?”
 “The disintegration of meditation on form is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation  on feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the eyes is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on a form is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on something accepted is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on something rejected is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the first concentration is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on the second, third, and fourth concentration is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on love is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on compassion, joy, and equanimity is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the station of endless space is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on the station of endless consciousness is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on the station of nothing-at-all is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on the station of neither perception nor nonperception is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on mindfulness of the Buddha is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of morality, mindfulness of giving away, mindfulness of the gods, mindfulness of disgust, mindfulness of breathing in and out, mindfulness of death, and mindfulness of what is included in the body  is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the idea of impermanence, the idea of suffering, and the idea of selflessness is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on dependent origination is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the idea of self is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on the idea of a being, the idea of a living being, the idea of a creature, the idea of one born of Manu, the idea of a child of Manu, the idea of one who lives, the idea of person, the idea of one who does, and the idea of one who makes someone else do is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the idea of permanence, the idea of beauty, the idea of happiness, and the idea of self is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the applications of mindfulness is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the emptiness meditative stabilization is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on the signlessness meditative stabilization is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on the wishlessness meditative stabilization is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the eight deliverances is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the nine serial absorptions is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the meditative stabilization  with applied and sustained thought, and the meditative stabilization without either applied or sustained thought is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the noble truth of suffering is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on the noble truth of origination, cessation, and the path is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of suffering is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of origination is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of cessation is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of the path is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of extinction is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of nonproduction is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of dharma is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of subsequent realization is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on conventional knowledge is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on knowledge of mastery is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on knowledge in accord with sound is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the perfection of giving is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, great emptiness, the emptiness of ultimate reality, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the ten tathāgata powers is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on the four fearlessnesses is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on the four detailed and thorough knowledges is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on great compassion is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the result of stream enterer is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, the disintegration of meditation on the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the state of a worthy one is meditation on the perfection of wisdom, and the disintegration of meditation on a pratyekabuddha’s awakening is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; the disintegration of meditation on the knowledge of all aspects is meditation on the perfection of wisdom; and the disintegration of meditation on the abandonment of all residual impression connections is meditation on the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how is the disintegration of meditation on form, meditation on the perfection of wisdom; and similarly, up to how is the disintegration of meditation on the abandonment of all residual impression connections, meditation on the perfection of wisdom?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not meditate on ‘form is an existent thing,’ and do not meditate on ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness  is an existent thing.’ And why? Subhūti, it is because someone with the notion of an existent thing is not meditating on the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, connect this with each, up to it is because someone with the notion that the knowledge of all aspects is an existent thing is not meditating on the perfection of wisdom. 
 “They do not meditate on ‘greed, hatred, or confusion is an existent thing.’ They do not meditate on ‘a bad proclivity or a snare is an existent thing.’ And why? Subhūti, it is because for someone with the notion of an existent thing there is no meditation on the perfection of giving, and no meditation on the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom. And why? Subhūti, it is because they are attached to an existent thing. But they do not get attached to giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom. There is no liberation for someone attached to the two extremes, thinking ‘this is me,’ in reference to an existent thing. Subhūti, someone with the notion of an existent thing is not meditating on the applications of mindfulness; is not meditating on the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, or path; is not meditating on emptiness; and is not meditating on signlessness or wishlessness. Similarly, connect this with each, up to is not meditating on the knowledge of all aspects. And why? Subhūti, it is because they are attached to an existent thing.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, what is an existent thing? What is a nonexistent thing?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “an existent thing is duality; a nonexistent thing is nonduality.”
 “Lord, what is duality?”
 “Subhūti, the perception of form is a duality, the perception  of feeling, perception, and volitional factors is a duality, and the perception of consciousness is a duality; the perception of the eyes, up to the perception of thinking mind is a duality; the perception of a form, up to the perception of dharmas is a duality; and similarly, connect this with each, up to the perception of buddha, the perception of awakening, the perception of a compounded element, the perception of an uncompounded element, and all perceptions, as many as there are, and nonperceptions, as many as there are, they are all duality. To the extent there is duality, to that extent there is an existent thing. To the extent there is an existent thing, to that extent there are volitional factors. To the extent there are volitional factors, to that extent beings are not free from birth, old age, sickness, death, pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief. In this way, Subhūti, you should know that for someone with dualistic perception there is no giving, there is no morality, there is no patience, there is no perseverance, there is no concentration, there is no wisdom, there is no path, and there is no clear realization. Given that there is not even the patience that arises in a natural order, how could there ever be the comprehension of form, up to the comprehension of consciousness, and similarly, also connect this with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects. How could there be, for someone for whom there is no meditation on the path, the result of stream enterer, up to the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and the abandonment of all residual impression connections?”
This was the sixty-ninth chapter, “An Explanation of Meditation on the Path,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 70: An Explanation of Serial Action, Training, and Practice
The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if there is not even the patience that arises in a natural order for someone with the perception of an existing thing, how could there be attainment, and how could there be clear realization? 
 “Given that there is not,  is there the patience that arises in a natural order for someone with the perception of a nonexistent thing? Is there the Śuklavipaśyanā level, Gotra level, Aṣṭamaka level, Darśana level, Tanū level, Vītarāga level, Kṛtāvin level, Pratyekabuddha level, Bodhisattva level, and cultivation of the path? And, thanks to the cultivation of the path, are the afflictions connected with śrāvakas and the afflictions connected with pratyekabuddhas eliminated? When obstructed by those afflictions, there is no entry into the secure state of a bodhisattva. Unless they have entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva, there is no gaining the knowledge of all aspects, and if they have not gained the knowledge of all aspects, there is no elimination of all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions. 
 “Lord, standing and production do not exist on account of any dharma at all; they will have no ability to reach the knowledge of all aspects through those unproduced dharmas.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! There is no patience that arises in a natural order for someone with the notion of a nonexistent thing. Similarly, connect this with each, up to there is no elimination of all residual impression connections.” 
 “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom have the perception of an existing thing or the perception of a nonexistent thing; or the perception of form, up to the perception of consciousness; up to or the perception of the knowledge of all aspects; or the perception of greed or the perception of the abandonment of greed, the perception of hatred or the perception of the abandonment of hatred, or the perception of confusion or the perception of the abandonment of confusion; or the perception of ignorance or the perception of the abandonment of ignorance, the perception of volitional factors  or the perception of the abandonment of volitional factors, the perception of consciousness or the perception of the abandonment of consciousness, the perception of name and form or the perception of the abandonment of name and form, the perception of the six sense fields or the perception of the abandonment of the six sense fields, the perception of contact or the perception of the abandonment of contact, the perception of feeling or the perception of the abandonment of feeling, the perception of craving or the perception of the abandonment of craving, the perception of appropriation or the perception of the abandonment of appropriation, the perception of existence or the perception of the abandonment of an existence, the perception of birth or the perception of the abandonment of birth, the perception of old age and death or the perception of the abandonment of old age and death, or the perception of pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief or the perception of the abandonment of pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief; or the perception of suffering or the perception of the abandonment of suffering, the perception of origination or the perception of the abandonment of origination, the perception of cessation or the perception of the realization of cessation, or the perception of the path or the perception of cultivation of the path; and similarly, or the perception of . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects or the perception of the elimination of all residual impression connections?”
 “Subhūti, they do not,” replied the Lord. “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not have the perception of any phenomenon at all as an existing thing or the perception of it as a nonexistent thing. 
 “Subhūti, where there is no perception of anything as an existing thing or perception of it as a nonexistent thing, that is the bodhisattva great beings’ patience that arises in a natural order; where there is no perception of anything as an existing thing or perception of it as a nonexistent thing, that is their meditation on the path; and where there is no perception of anything as an existing thing  or perception of it as a nonexistent thing, that is their result. 
 “Subhūti, the bodhisattva great beings’ path is a nonexistent thing. Clear realization is a nonexistent thing. In this way, Subhūti, you should thus know that all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.” 
The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, how did the Tathāgata fully awaken to all the phenomena that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and, having fully awakened to them, gain control over the range of all phenomena?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here, earlier when I was practicing the bodhisattva’s practice of the six perfections, detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, up to perfectly accomplishing and dwelling in the fourth concentration, even while apprehending a causal sign of the concentrations and the branches of the concentrations I did not falsely project those concentrations and those branches of the concentrations, did not relish the experience of the concentrations, and did not falsely consider the concentrations a fact. I made my mind incline toward becoming absorbed in those concentrations in their purified forms to make the performance of miraculous power manifest. I made my mind incline toward making divine ear knowledge manifest, toward making knowledge of the ways of thinking manifest, toward making knowledge that recollects previous states of existence manifest, and to making divine eye knowledge manifest. Even though I apprehended a causal sign of those clairvoyances to be made manifest, I did not falsely project them, did not relish their experience, and did not falsely consider them a fact.  I became absorbed in those clairvoyances seeing them like space. Subhūti, with the wisdom of the unique single instant, having fully awakened to the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening that correctly knows, ‘This is suffering, this is the origination of suffering, this is the cessation of suffering, and this is the path leading to the cessation of suffering,’ endowed with the ten tathāgata powers, and endowed with the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, I prophesied the three masses of beings.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, how has a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha produced the four concentrations that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature? How have they produced the clairvoyances that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature? And how, given that beings do not exist, have they still prophesied the three masses of beings?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, were an intrinsic nature of sense objects or of wrong unwholesome dharmas to exist, or their intrinsic existence, or their dependent existence to exist, then, Subhūti, earlier when I was practicing the bodhisattva’s practice I would not have realized sense objects that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and wrong unwholesome dharmas that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and perfectly accomplished and dwelled in the first concentration. Subhūti, because sense objects and wrong unwholesome dharmas are not existent things, or nonexistent things, or intrinsically existent things, or dependently existent things, but quite the opposite—they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature—therefore earlier when I was practicing the bodhisattva’s practice, detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, I perfectly accomplished and dwelled in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy  and happiness born of detachment, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the fourth concentration. 
 “Subhūti, were clairvoyant knowledges existing things, intrinsically existent things, or dependently existent things, then, Subhūti, I would not have realized that all clairvoyant knowledges are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Subhūti, because in all clairvoyant knowledges there is no existing thing, there is no intrinsically existent thing, or dependently existent thing, but quite the opposite—they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature—therefore the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha comprehended all the clairvoyant knowledges that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if, even while all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, bodhisattva great beings will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening through the four concentrations and five clairvoyances, well then, Lord, how, even while all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, will there be serial action, serial training, and serial practice—the serial action, serial training, and serial practice through which they will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings from the very outset have heard from the lord buddhas, from the bodhisattvas attending on many buddhas, and from the worthy ones, non-returners, once-returners, and the stream enterers  that an intrinsic nature of the lord buddhas is nonexistent, an intrinsic nature of pratyekabuddhas is nonexistent, an intrinsic nature of worthy ones is nonexistent, an intrinsic nature of non-returners is nonexistent, an intrinsic nature of once-returners is nonexistent, an intrinsic nature of stream enterers is nonexistent, an intrinsic nature of all noble beings is nonexistent, and that all compounded phenomena do not have an intrinsic nature even as tiny as the part occupying the tip of a strand of hair. Even though the bodhisattva great beings have heard that, still it occurs to them to think, ‘Given that an intrinsic nature of the lord buddhas, up to of stream enterers is nonexistent, whether I will fully awaken or whether I will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, the intrinsic nature of all dharmas is just nonexistent. When I fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening I will, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, establish all beings dwelling in the perception of existing things in the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.’ 
 “Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings set out for perfect, complete awakening so that all beings will pass into complete nirvāṇa. They undertake the serial action, serial training, and serial practice in which earlier bodhisattva great beings trained and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They first of all train in the six perfections, training in the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom. 
 “Training in the perfection of giving they personally give gifts, establish others in giving, speak in praise of giving, and speak in praise of others giving gifts as well, welcoming it. Through that familiarization with giving they will gain a huge heap of enjoyments. Free from miserly thoughts they give gifts—they give food to those begging for food, drinks to those who want drink, transport to those who want transport, clothes to those who want clothes, incense to those who want incense, flower garlands to those who want flower garlands, creams to those who want creams, beds to those who want beds, pillows to those who want pillows, homes to those who want a home, and lamps to those who want lamps—they give whatever human requirements are appropriate.
 “They, with just that giving, guard the aggregate of morality, and with just that giving, and morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation they transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels. Having transcended the śrāvaka level and pratyekabuddha level, they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva; having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva, they purify a buddhafield, bring beings to maturity, then gain the knowledge of all aspects and turn the wheel of the Dharma. Having turned the wheel of the Dharma, they establish beings in the three vehicles and free them from saṃsāra. Therefore, Subhūti, through the bodhisattva great beings’ giving there is serial action, and this action, in its entirety, cannot be apprehended. And why? Because it has no intrinsic nature. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, starting from the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings personally practice the perfection of morality, and also establish others in the perfection of morality, and similarly, connect this with each, up to welcoming it. With that morality they also attain the preeminent state of a god and the preeminent state of a human and give wealth to destitute beings. Having given it they establish beings in morality, and establish them in meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and the knowledge and seeing of liberation. With that aggregate of morality, aggregate of meditative stabilization, aggregate of wisdom, aggregate of liberation, and aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation they transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels. Having transcended them, with just that aggregate of morality, up to aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and similarly, connect this with each, up to free beings from saṃsāra. Therefore, Subhūti, through the bodhisattva great beings’ morality there is serial action, and this action, in its entirety, cannot be apprehended. And why? Because it has no intrinsic nature. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, starting from the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings personally practice the perfection of patience, and also establish others in the perfection of patience, and similarly, connect this with each, up to welcoming it. While practicing that perfection of patience they satisfy beings by giving, establish them in morality, establish them in meditative stabilization, up to and establish them in the knowledge and seeing of liberation. With that aggregate of morality, aggregate of meditative stabilization, aggregate of wisdom, aggregate of liberation, and aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation they transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels. Having transcended the śrāvaka level and pratyekabuddha levels . . . , similarly, connect this with each, up to gain awakening. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings personally persevere at all wholesome dharmas,  and also establishes others in perseverance, and similarly, connect this with each, up to welcoming it. Similarly, connect this with each, up to it has no intrinsic nature. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings personally become absorbed in the concentrations, become absorbed in the immeasurables and formless absorptions, and also establish others in . . . , up to the formless absorptions, and similarly, connect this with each, up to speak in praise of the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions, and speak in praise of those who are becoming absorbed in the concentrations, immeasurables, and formless absorptions as well, welcoming it. Abiding in those concentrations, and in those immeasurables and formless absorptions, they satisfy beings by giving, establish them in morality, establish them in patience, establish them in perseverance, establish them in meditative stabilization, establish them in wisdom, establish them in liberation, and establish them in the knowledge and seeing of liberation. Endowed with that knowledge and seeing of liberation they transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels. Having transcended them, with that knowledge and seeing of liberation they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva. Similarly, connect this with each, from gain the knowledge of all aspects, up to it has no intrinsic nature. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, starting from the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom satisfy beings by giving, establish them in morality, establish them in patience, establish them in perseverance, establish them in meditative stabilization, establish them in wisdom, establish them in liberation, and establish them in the knowledge and seeing of liberation. 
 “While practicing the perfection of wisdom they personally give gifts, guard morality, make a practice of being patient, make a vigorous effort, become absorbed in meditative stabilization, and cultivate wisdom. They also establish others in giving, establish them in morality, establish them in patience, establish them in perseverance, establish them in meditative stabilization, and establish them in wisdom, connect this with each, up to welcoming it. Endowed with the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, perfection of wisdom, and with skillful means, they transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels, will enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Connect this with each, up to it has no intrinsic nature.
 “Therefore, Subhūti, there is the bodhisattva great beings’ serial action, and serial training, and serial practice as well. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training in serial action, serial training, and serial practice, starting from the first production of the thought, with attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects, believe that all phenomena are without an intrinsic nature and cultivate mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of morality, mindfulness of giving away, and mindfulness of the gods. 
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings cultivate mindfulness of the Buddha? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings do not pay attention to tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas as form, and do not pay attention to them as feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. And why? Because form has no intrinsic nature  and anything without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing, and because feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness have no intrinsic nature and anything without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Mindfulness of the Buddha, therefore, is not being mindful and not paying attention.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should not pay attention to a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha as the thirty-two major marks of a great person, you should not pay attention to the body golden in color, you should not pay attention to the halo extending the length of the outstretched arms, and you should not pay attention to how it has eighty minor signs. And why? Because that body has no intrinsic nature and anything without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Mindfulness of the Buddha, therefore, is not being mindful and not paying attention.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should not pay attention to a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha as the aggregate of morality, you should not pay attention to the aggregate of meditative stabilization, you should not pay attention to aggregate of wisdom, you should not pay attention to the aggregate of liberation, and you should not pay attention to the aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation. And why? Because they have no intrinsic nature and anything without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Mindfulness of the Buddha, therefore, is not being mindful and not paying attention. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should not pay attention to a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha as the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, or eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. And why? Because they have no intrinsic nature and anything without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Mindfulness of the Buddha, therefore, is not being mindful and not paying attention.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, you should not pay attention to a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha as a dependent origination. And why? Because it has no intrinsic nature  and anything without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Mindfulness of the Buddha, therefore, is not being mindful and not paying attention.
 “Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should pay attention to the Buddha. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti, there is the bodhisattva great beings’ serial action, and serial training, and serial practice as well. When they are training in this serial action, and training in serial training and serial practice, they complete the four applications of mindfulness; complete the four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; complete the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization; up to and complete the knowledge of all aspects by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. They fully awaken to all phenomena as just the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, but they do not have the perception of intrinsic nature or the perception of nonexistence.
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings cultivate mindfulness of the Dharma? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not pay attention to wholesome dharmas, should not pay attention to unwholesome dharmas, and should not pay attention to dharmas that are an object of moral inquiry and are not an object of moral inquiry, or are ordinary and extraordinary, noble and not noble, with outflows and without outflows, belonging to the desire realm, belonging to the form realm, or belonging to and not belonging to the formless realm, or to compounded dharmas and uncompounded dharmas. And why? Because those dharmas have no intrinsic nature and anything  without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Mindfulness of the Dharma, therefore, is not being mindful and not paying attention. When they have trained in this dharma-constituent by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, they gain . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects. They fully awaken to all dharmas as the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. They do not have the perception of intrinsic nature or the perception of nonexistence. Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings should cultivate a mindfulness of the Dharma. There is not even an atom of a mindfulness dharma there, so what further need is there to say that there is no absence of mindfulness?
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings cultivate mindfulness of the Saṅgha? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should be mindful that the lord’s śrāvaka saṅgha—those four pairs of persons and eight individual persons—have no intrinsic nature. Connect this with those four pairs of persons and eight individual persons are categories of the absence of an intrinsic nature, of a nonexistent thing. Having paid attention to this as just a nonexistent thing, having gained the knowledge of all aspects . . . , up to mindfulness of the Saṅgha is not being mindful and not paying attention. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should cultivate mindfulness of the Saṅgha like that. There is not even an atom of a mindfulness dharma there.
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings cultivate mindfulness of morality? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, starting from the first production of the thought, grounded in an unpunctured, unflagging, unadulterated, untarnished, autonomous, well-completed morality praised by the wise and conducive to meditative stabilization, pay attention to that morality as the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, paying attention in such a way that there is not even an atom of the action of mindfulness. Connect this with each, up to they will gain the knowledge of all aspects but have no perception of an existing thing or perception of a nonexistent thing. 
 “Subhūti, how should bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom pay attention to being mindful of giving away? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, starting from the first production of the thought, should be mindful to give away material possessions and to give the doctrine, by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, without producing the thoughts on account of their giving away, that ‘I am giving’ or ‘I am not giving,’ or ‘I am giving away’ or ‘I am not giving away.’ They should not produce those thoughts even if giving away a major or minor part of the body. And why? Because it has no intrinsic nature. They practice mindfulness of giving away like that. Practicing like that they gradually gain . . . up to the knowledge of all aspects. It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should pay attention to giving away. 
 “Subhūti, how should bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom pay attention to mindfulness of the gods? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should pay attention to those stream enterers who have taken birth among the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to those who have taken birth among the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods, by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. And why? Because they have no intrinsic nature and anything without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Therefore, they should pay attention to those gods by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. There is not even an atom of the action of mindfulness there. Paying attention like that they gradually pay attention . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects and gain . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, they should pay attention to those non-returners living in the form realm and living in the formless realm by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. And why?  Because they have no intrinsic nature and anything without an intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing. Therefore, they should pay attention to those gods by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Similarly, connect this with each, up to they will gain the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should pay attention to all those six mindfulnesses like that. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings paying attention to all those six mindfulnesses have serial action, and have serial training, and serial practice. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who want to complete the serial action, serial training, and serial practice should train in inner emptiness, up to should train in the emptiness of its own mark; should train in the four applications of mindfulness; and similarly, connect this with each, up to should train in great compassion, by way of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. When they train in the awakening path like that, they fully awaken to all phenomena that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. There is not even an atom of the action of mindfulness there, so what further need is there to say that there is no form, up to however could there be the knowledge of a knower of all aspects? It is impossible. 
 “Therefore, Subhūti, there is serial action of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, there is serial training and serial practice, but thought activity action, thought activity training, and the path of thought activity do not exist there.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, if all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, well then, there is no form, up to there is no consciousness; there are no aggregates, there are no constituents, and there are no sense fields; there are no applications of mindfulness, and similarly, up to there is no knowledge of all aspects; there is no Buddha, there is no Dharma, and there is no Saṅgha; there is no path, there is no result, there is no defilement, there is no purification, there is no attainment, and there is no clear realization; and similarly, up to there are no phenomena, any of them.” 
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord asked him, “Subhūti, do you think you can apprehend a ‘there-is’ or a ‘there-is-not’ in all phenomena that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature?” 
 “No, Lord,” he replied. “You cannot apprehend a ‘there-is’ or a ‘there-is-not’ in any phenomena that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.” 
 “Subhūti,” he asked further, “if all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, how, on that account, could there be no form, up to how could there be no consciousness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to how could there be no attainment, and how could there be no clear realization? How could that be?”
 The Lord having asked that, venerable Subhūti answered him, “Lord, even though I am not of two minds and do not entertain any doubt about these dharmas, still, at a time yet to come, householder beings, those who have gone forth to homelessness, are in the Śrāvaka Vehicle, are in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and are in the Bodhisattva Vehicle, will say, ‘Were all phenomena to be the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, then, since all phenomena would be the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, who would become defiled or purified?’ Without an understanding of defilement and purification they will ruin morality, ruin view, and ruin conduct. Those whose morality has been ruined, view has been ruined, and conduct has been ruined  can expect to die in one or other of the three terrible forms of life—life in the hells, or life in the animal world, or life in the world of Yama. Lord, seeing the danger of this happening in the future I have questioned the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha on just this matter. Lord, I am not of two minds about these dharmas and do not entertain any doubt about them.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” said the Lord. “It is exactly as you say!”
This was the seventieth chapter, “An Explanation of Serial Action, Training, and Practice,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 71: The True Nature of Dharmas That Cannot Be Apprehended
The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, Lord, what reality do bodhisattva great beings who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the welfare of beings see?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “just as all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, in exactly the same way bodhisattva great beings set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Subhūti, an apprehended object is severely limiting. Someone who perceives an apprehended object has no attainment, has no clear realization, and has no unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Lord, without an apprehended object is there attainment, is there clear realization, and is there unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “Subhūti, just the absence of an apprehended object is attainment, the attainment of just the absence of an apprehended object is clear realization, and just the absence of an apprehended object is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, because it does not complicate the dharma-constituent. To want an attainment,  or clear realization, or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, which is just the absence of an apprehended object, is simply to want to complicate the dharma-constituent.”
 “Lord, if in the absence of an apprehended object there is no attainment, there is no clear realization, and there is no unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, if just the absence of an apprehended object is attainment, just the absence of an apprehended object is clear realization, and just the absence of an apprehended object is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, in that case, Lord, how will there be the bodhisattva great beings’ first level, how a second level, up to how a tenth level; how will there be forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas? How will there be the five clairvoyances arisen from maturation, how will there be giving arisen from maturation, how will there be morality arisen from maturation, how will there be patience arisen from maturation, how will there be perseverance arisen from maturation, how will there be concentration arisen from maturation, and how will there be wisdom arisen from maturation? How will there be those maturation dharmas of these bodhisattvas that are in an unbroken stream, and situated in which they bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield, and attend on the lord buddhas with food, drink, clothes, transportation, incense, garlands, beds, seats, lamps, and things that make human life enjoyable—food and so on that does not finish even though the maturation is for the worship of the physical remains of the buddhas after complete nirvāṇa, for as long as they remain, and for the śrāvakas?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, it is just because of that absence of an apprehended object that there is a first level, up to a tenth level; and it is just because of it that there are the clairvoyances arisen from maturation, that there are those wholesome roots on account of which they work for the welfare of beings, up to and even after having passed into complete nirvāṇa there are still the acts of worship. It is just because of it that giving arisen from maturation exists, as well as morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom arisen from maturation. It is just because of it that wholesome roots arisen from maturation exist.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked, “Lord, what distinction and what differentiation is there between the absence of an apprehended object, and giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, wisdom, and the clairvoyances?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, there is no differentiation at all between giving, up to the clairvoyances in the absence of an apprehended object. Subhūti, an exposition is made differentiating between unsullied giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, wisdom, and the clairvoyances.”
 “Lord, how is an exposition made that differentiates between unapprehended giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, wisdom, and the clairvoyances?”
 “Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom they give a gift without apprehending something to be given, without apprehending a recipient, without apprehending a giver, and without apprehending giving; they guard morality without apprehending morality as an object, cause patience to arise without apprehending patience as an object, make an effort at perseverance without apprehending perseverance as an object, become absorbed in concentration without apprehending concentration as an object, cultivate wisdom without apprehending wisdom as an object, and practice  the clairvoyances without apprehending the clairvoyant knowledges as an object; they cultivate the applications of mindfulness without apprehending the applications of mindfulness as an object, up to cultivate the eightfold noble path without apprehending the eightfold noble path as an object; they cultivate the three meditative stabilizations without apprehending the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, up to or wishlessness meditative stabilization as an object; they bring beings to maturity without apprehending beings as an object; they purify a buddhafield without apprehending a buddhafield as an object; and they fully awaken to awakening without apprehending the buddhadharmas as an object. Subhūti, in that way bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom without apprehending anything. Subhūti, Māra and the Māra class of gods are hard pressed to overpower bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom in that way.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, how do they incorporate the six perfections in a single thought; how do they incorporate the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; and how do they incorporate the three gateways to liberation, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great compassion, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and the thirty-two major marks and eighty minor signs of a great person?”
 “Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom,  whatever gift they give, their giving is informed by nothing other than the perfection of wisdom. Whatever morality they guard, whatever patience they cultivate, whatever perseverance they make an effort at, and whatever concentration they become absorbed in, they are informed by nothing other than the perfection of wisdom. Whatever concentrations they become absorbed in, they too are informed by nothing other than the perfection of wisdom; whatever immeasurables they become absorbed in, they too are informed by nothing other than the perfection of wisdom; and whatever formless absorptions they become absorbed in, they too are informed by nothing other than the perfection of wisdom. Whatever applications of mindfulness they cultivate, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the eighty minor signs of a great person, they are informed by nothing other than the perfection of wisdom.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked, “Lord, how, informed by the perfection of wisdom, do bodhisattva great beings incorporate the six perfections in a single thought, and similarly, up to how do they incorporate the eighty minor signs?”
 “Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, whatever gift they give, it is informed by nothing other than the perfection of wisdom and they do not have a dualistic notion about it. Whatever morality they guard, they do not have a dualistic notion about it; whatever patience they cultivate, they do not have a dualistic notion about it; whatever perseverance they make an effort at, they do not have a dualistic notion about it; whatever concentration they become absorbed in, they do not have a dualistic notion about it, and similarly, connect this with each, up to . . . the eighty minor signs they accomplish, they do not have a dualistic notion about them.” 
 “Lord, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, how do they not, when giving a gift, have a dualistic notion about it, and similarly, up to when they accomplish the eighty minor signs, how do they not have a dualistic notion about them?”
 “Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they complete the perfection of giving. Having included all six perfections within their perfection of giving, they give gifts. Similarly, they complete all the dharmas on the side of awakening, up to and having included all six perfections within the path, they cultivate the path. 
 “Subhūti, here when the time is right for bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to give a gift, they give the gift while remaining in a thought without outflows. Remaining in a thought without outflows, they do not see causal signs of ‘someone to whom I am giving,’ ‘something I am giving,’ or ‘someone who is giving.’ They give the gift with a thought free from causal signs, with a thought without outflows, without craving, and without ignorance. They do not even see the thought, do not even see the giving, up to and do not see all dharmas. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they guard morality with a thought free from causal signs. They do not even see the morality, up to do not see all dharmas. They cultivate patience with a thought free from causal signs. They do not even see the patience, up to do not see all dharmas. They do not see those buddhadharmas.  They make an effort at perseverance with a thought free from causal signs. They do not even see the perseverance, up to do not see all dharmas. They become absorbed in concentration with a thought free from causal signs. They do not even see the concentration. They complete . . . , up to all the buddhadharmas but they do not see them all. They cultivate wisdom with a thought free from causal signs, and similarly, connect this with each, up to all the buddhadharmas. They cultivate the four applications of mindfulness with a thought free from causal signs, and similarly, connect this with each, up to accomplish the eighty minor signs.”
 “Lord, given that all dharmas are without causal signs and do not occasion anything, how is the perfection of giving completed; how are the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom completed; how are the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path completed; how are the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations completed; and how are the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha completed?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they give gifts with a thought free from causal signs;  they give food to those begging for food, up to whatever human requirements are appropriate; and, having made a gift of it, they give the inner (major and minor parts of the body) or outer (wife, son, daughter, the kingdom) to beggars.
 “If someone comes up to those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom and says to them, ‘This sort of gift you have given is worthless, so what use will it be?” it occurs to them to think, ‘These beings are criticizing me, saying, “This piffling gift you have given is useless,” but still, this is a gift that I should give, not a gift I should not give.’ They make that gift into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and one way or the other they make the dedication in such a way that they still do not see a causal sign; they do not see ‘something I am giving,’ ‘someone to whom I am giving,’ or ‘someone who is giving,’ or see something the dedication is for, a dedication, something being dedicated, someone who is dedicating, or a place when the giving has been done where one dedicates it to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? It is because of inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the emptiness of its own mark. They thus see what the dedication is for, what will be dedicated, and who will dedicate. When they have dedicated it like that, they have done the dedication well. They bring beings to maturity and take possession of a buddhafield. They complete the perfection of giving, and complete the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance,  perfection of concentration, perfection of wisdom, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, but still without grasping at the result. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods bring all their goods into being just by thinking about them. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings complete all their goods just by thinking about them too. With that richness of goods, they attend on the buddhas, satisfy the world with its gods, humans, and asuras, and by giving them to beings attract them and establish them in the three vehicles. Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom thus complete the perfection of giving. 
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the perfection of morality? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the perfection of morality. They gain a noble morality without outflows, incorporated into the path, gained through the true nature of dharmas. That personal morality, furthermore, is unflagging, unpunctured, unadulterated, unfragmented, autonomous, untarnished, well-completed morality praised by the wise. On account of that morality they do not grasp any dharmas as absolute—they do not grasp form as absolute; or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness; or the thirty-two major marks of a great person; or a great sāla tree–like royal family, or a great sāla tree–like brahmin family, or a great sāla tree–like business family;  or the Cāturmahā­rājika gods; or the Trāyastriṃśa, or Yāma, or Tuṣita, or Nirmāṇarati, or Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, or Brahmakāyika, or Brahmapurohita, or Brahmapārṣadya, or Parīttābha, or Apramāṇābha, or Ābhāsvara, or Parīttaśubha, or Apramāṇaśubha, or Śubhakṛtsna, or Bṛhatphala, or Asaṃjñisattva, or Avṛha, or Atapa, or Sudṛśa, or Sudarśana, or Akaniṣṭha, or Ākāśānantyāyatana, or Vijñānānantyāyatana, or Ākiṃcityāyatana, or Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana; or the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; or the empire of a wheel-turning emperor, or sovereignty over an empire. On the contrary, they make it into something shared in common by all beings and dedicate it by way of signlessness, nonapprehending, and nonduality to the knowledge of all aspects by way of ordinary convention, but not ultimately. Through that completion of the perfection of morality and skillful means they generate the four concentrations without relishing them. They accomplish those divine eyes arisen from maturation that see the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in the eastern direction, a seeing of those bodhisattvas not lost until full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. The divine eyes see the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in the south, west, north, and the intermediate directions, a seeing of those bodhisattvas not lost until full awakening  to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. With superhuman, purified divine hearing, a hearing that is not lost until their own and others’ needs have been taken care of, they hear the voices of the lord buddhas. With knowledge of the ways of thinking they know with their minds the thoughts of those lord buddhas and with that knowledge of the ways of thinking take care of the needs of beings. With knowledge that recollects previous states of existence, they give an exposition of earlier action, action that will not be lost once it has been done. With knowledge that outflows are extinguished, they establish beings in the result of stream enterer, up to establish them in the state of a worthy one, establish them in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and establish them in unsurpassed awakening. They establish beings in whatever wholesome dharmas they are capable of. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus complete the perfection of morality with a thought free from causal signs. 
“Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the perfection of patience when dharmas are without causal signs, without effort, not apprehended, and do not occasion anything? Starting from the first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, those bodhisattva great beings should not provide an opportunity for even a single feeling of emotional upset to arise even if all beings come and deal blows with sticks, clubs, and swords. 
 “There bodhisattva great beings should cultivate two sorts of patience. What are the two? They are being patient in the face of all beings criticizing and humiliating them, as well as dealing blows with sticks, clubs, and swords, and having forbearance for dharmas that are not produced. 
 “There, when being humiliated  and reproached, or dealt blows with sticks, clubs, and swords, bodhisattva great beings should analyze like this: ‘Who is humiliating and reproaching me, or dealing me blows with sticks, clubs, and swords?’ They should analyze the intrinsic nature of dharmas. When they analyze their intrinsic nature and do not even apprehend just the dharmas themselves, how could they ever apprehend an intrinsic nature of dharmas? When they analyze the intrinsic nature of dharmas like that, it occurs to them to think, ‘Who is cutting or stabbing me?’ When they analyze the intrinsic nature of dharmas like that, they gain the forbearance for dharmas that are not produced.
 “What is forbearance for dharmas that are not produced? It is the state in which affliction is not produced and the state in which knowledge does not leave anything out. 
 “Persisting with these two types of patience they complete the four concentrations; they complete the four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, four applications of mindfulness, up to eightfold noble path; and they complete the three gateways to liberation, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Standing in those noble dharmas without outflows, extraordinary dharmas not shared in common with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, they complete the noble clairvoyant knowledges, and having completed those clairvoyances they persist with those clairvoyances, seeing with the purified divine eye the lord buddhas in the eastern direction, and, seeing them, also obtain mindfulness of the Buddha. Their mindfulness of the Buddha is unbroken until full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Similarly, as well, up to the intermediate directions.
 “With the divine ear constituent, they take up all that is said by those lord buddhas, and, having taken it up, practice for suchness and teach to beings  the doctrine for suchness. They know with their minds the thoughts of those lord buddhas. With the knowledge of the ways of thinking, they also know with their minds the thoughts of all beings. Knowing the thoughts of all beings, they teach them the doctrine for suchness. With knowledge that recollects previous states of existence, they know the wholesome roots of those beings and through those wholesome roots get them excited and activate them. With knowledge that outflows are extinguished, they cause beings to enter the three vehicles and establish them there. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield, practice the knowledge of all aspects, and, having completed the knowledge of all aspects and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, turn the wheel of the Dharma. In that way, Subhūti, the perfection of patience of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom is completed. 
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings complete the perfection of perseverance when dharmas are without causal signs, without effort, not apprehended, and do not occasion anything? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom in full possession of physical effort and in full possession of mental effort become absorbed in the first concentration and stay there, up to become absorbed in the fourth concentration and stay there. Absorbed in the four concentrations they experience various performances of miraculous power: They stroke both the sun and moon with their hands. In full possession of that physical effort they approach those lord buddhas standing  in the many hundred thousand world systems in the eastern direction and wait on those lord buddhas with robes, alms, beds and seats, medicines for sicknesses, and requirements. Those robes and alms of theirs, furthermore, do not run out until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And, having fully awakened, the world with its gods, humans, and asuras feels joy from the robes and alms. So, when they have entered into complete nirvāṇa their physical remains are worshiped too. 
 “Through just that enactment of miraculous power they approach and listen to the doctrine from those lord buddhas, and until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, nothing at all that they have heard is lost. Practicing the knowledge of all aspects, they bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings in full possession of physical effort practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the perfection of perseverance. 
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings in full possession of the noble mental effort without outflows incorporated into the path and as a branch of the path complete the perfection of perseverance? Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings in full possession of mental effort practicing the perfection of wisdom provide no opportunity for unwholesome physical action and provide no opportunity for unwholesome verbal action. They do not grasp as absolute either ‘permanent’ or ‘impermanent’; or ‘happiness’ or ‘suffering’; or ‘self’ or ‘selfless’; or ‘compounded’ or ‘uncompounded’;  or ‘desire realm’ or ‘form realm’ or ‘formless realm’; or ‘realm with outflows’ or ‘realm without outflows’; or ‘first concentration’ up to or ‘fourth concentration’; or ‘love’ or ‘compassion’ or ‘joy’ or ‘equanimity’; or ‘the station of endless space’ up to or ‘the station of neither perception nor nonperception’; or ‘applications of mindfulness’ or ‘right efforts’ or ‘legs of miraculous power’ or ‘faculties’ or ‘powers’ or ‘limbs of awakening’ or ‘eightfold noble path’; or ‘emptiness’ or ‘signlessness’ or ‘wishlessness.’ They do not grasp . . . , up to ‘the buddhadharmas are permanent’ or ‘impermanent,’ or ‘happiness’ or ‘suffering,’ or ‘self’ or ‘selfless’ as absolute. They do not grasp ‘the result of stream enterer,’ or ‘the result of once-returner,’ or ‘the result of non-returner,’ or ‘the state of a worthy one,’ or ‘a pratyekabuddha’s awakening’ as absolute. Similarly, connect this with each, up to they do not grasp ‘stream enterer,’ up to or ‘pratyekabuddha,’ or ‘bodhisattva’ as absolute. They do not grasp as absolute ‘these beings are in the Darśana category,’ or ‘these beings are in the Tanū category,’ up to ‘these beings are in the associated with the lower realms category,’ ‘these are in the associated with the upper realms category,’ ‘these are in the pratyekabuddha category,’ or even ‘these are in the knowledge of path aspects category.’ And why?  Because the intrinsic nature on account of which they would be categorized as having that intrinsic nature does not exist.
 “Even on the verge of death, in full possession of mental effort they work for the welfare of beings but without apprehending beings; complete the perfection of perseverance but also without apprehending that perseverance; complete . . . , up to the buddhadharmas but without apprehending those buddhadharmas; and purify a buddhafield but without apprehending a buddhafield. In full possession of that physical and mental effort they appropriate all wholesome dharmas but without being attached to them, and, unattached, pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield, and pass on from world system to world system working for the welfare of beings. Whatever miracle of miraculous power they want to magically create, they magically create those miracles of miraculous power, be it with a rain of flowers, with a burst of fragrance, with a clap of thunder, with the sound of music, or with an earthquake; be it by revealing the earth made up of the seven precious stones, by emitting light from themselves for the sake of beings in darkness, by emitting a perfumed smell, or by making a sacrifice without killing anything; or be it by stopping killing, up to stopping wrong view. Whatever means are appropriate for working for the welfare of beings, those means they utilize to work for the welfare of beings: looking after some with giving, looking after others with morality, for the sake of some giving away a major or minor part of their body, for the sake of others giving away a son and wife, for the sake of some giving away a kingdom, and for the sake of others giving away themselves. 
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings in full possession of mental effort practicing the perfection of wisdom, standing in dharmas without a name and without a causal sign, complete the perfection of perseverance. 
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, standing in dharmas without a name and without a causal sign, complete the perfection of meditative stabilization? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete all meditative stabilizations except a tathāgata’s meditative stabilization. 
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, perfectly accomplish and dwell in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment. They perfectly accomplish and dwell in . . . , up to the fourth concentration; perfectly accomplish and dwell pervading all the world with a mind endowed with love, up to with a mind endowed with equanimity; and perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. From the perfection of meditative stabilization they become absorbed in and emerge from the eight deliverances in a conforming and nonconforming order; they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the nine serial absorptions and the emptiness meditative stabilization; they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the signlessness meditative stabilization and wishlessness meditative stabilization; they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the uninterrupted meditative stabilization; and they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the elevated meditative stabilization, the perfect meditative stabilization, and the vajropama meditative stabilization. Dwelling in this perfection of meditative stabilization they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening. Dwelling in this perfection of meditative stabilization, with the knowledge of a knower of path aspects,  they incorporate the collection of meditative stabilizations into the knowledge of path aspects, and, having passed beyond the Śuklavipaśyanā level, Gotra level, Aṣṭamaka level, Darśana level, Tanū level, Vītarāga level, Kṛtāvin level, and Pratyekabuddha level, they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva and complete the Buddha level. But even though they practice those they do not, in the interim, acquire the results. Standing in this perfection of meditative stabilization, they pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield and attend on the lord buddhas. Through their attendance on those lord buddhas, they generate wholesome roots from those lord buddhas and purify a buddhafield. They pass on from world system to world system working for the welfare of beings, looking after some with giving, and looking after others with morality, others with meditative stabilization, others with wisdom, others with liberation, and others with the knowledge and seeing of liberation. They establish some in the result of stream enterer, and similarly, connect this with each, up to establish some in the state of a worthy one, and establish some in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening. They connect beings with whatever wholesome dharmas are to be imparted to them. Standing in this perfection of meditative stabilization, they accomplish all the dhāraṇī gateways, acquire the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and acquire the clairvoyances arisen from maturation. They are never again born in a mother’s womb and never again indulge in sense gratification. There is no birth they do not take and yet they are still unsullied by the disadvantages of those births. And why? Because they see well that all dharmas are like an illusion. Having realized the fact that all compounded phenomena are like an illusion, they work for the welfare of all beings even though beings  and even the designation of a being cannot be apprehended there. Without personally apprehending anything, they cause all beings to remain free from apprehending anything based on ordinary convention, but not ultimately. Standing in this perfection of meditative stabilization, they practice all the concentrations, deliverances, and absorptions, and until fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are never separated from the perfection of meditative stabilization. Standing in this perfection of meditative stabilization they find and produce within themselves the knowledge of all aspects. Standing there they eliminate all residual impressions and connections, and, having eliminated all residual impressions and connections, they work for their own and others’ welfare. As they are working for their own and others’ welfare, they become worthy of the offerings of the world with its gods, humans, and asuras.
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the signless perfection of meditative stabilization.
 “Subhūti, how, when all dharmas are without a causal sign, do bodhisattva great beings complete the perfection of wisdom? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see any dharma as truly existent or thoroughly established. They do not see form as truly existent or thoroughly established, up to and do not see consciousness as truly existent or thoroughly established; they do not see the production of form, up to and do not see the production of consciousness; and because they do not see the production of form, up to do not see the production of consciousness, they do not see an opening  for the production of form and do not see . . . , up to an opening for the production of consciousness, and therefore they do not see the amassing of form, do not see . . . , up to the amassing of consciousness; and similarly, up to they do not see an opening for the production of all dharmas with outflows and without outflows, because they see that they are in vain, ring hollow, and are pointless. When they contemplate like that, they do not apprehend an intrinsic nature of form; similarly, connect this with each, up to they do not apprehend an intrinsic nature of all dharmas with outflows and without outflows, because those practicing the perfection of wisdom believe about all dharmas that they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. On account of believing like that and practicing inner emptiness, up to practicing the emptiness of its own mark, they do not settle down on any dharma; they do not settle down on form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness; and similarly, connect this with or on any dharma, up to awakening. 
 “Practicing the perfection of wisdom that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, they complete the awakening path—namely, they complete the six perfections, up to the dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and the eighty minor signs. Standing on the bodhisattva’s path that is those maturation dharmas, when they complete the six perfections and the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening and complete the clairvoyances arisen from maturation, they gather into a retinue with giving those beings who can be gathered with giving; those who can be gathered with morality, who can be gathered with meditative stabilization, who can be gathered with wisdom, and who can be gathered with liberation;  and they gather into a retinue with the knowledge and seeing of liberation those beings who can be gathered with the knowledge and seeing of liberation. They establish in the result of stream enterer those beings who can be established in the result of stream enterer; those who can be established in the result of once-returner, who can be established in the result of non-returner, who can be established in the state of a worthy one, and who can be established in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; and they establish in awakening those beings who can be established in awakening. Connect this to them all in the same way.
 “Performing various miraculous powers, they go to as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, and in those world systems they magically produce those jewels—the sorts of jewels they want there, when and as they want them, completely fulfilling the desires of those beings—passing on from world system to world system. Having seen those world systems, they take possession of a buddhafield with all the possessions and enjoyments there of the sort the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods have, and the possessions and enjoyments that come about in other buddhafields, the type that they do not even need to seek for. 
 “Practicing the knowledge of path aspects, through the perfection of giving, the perfection of morality, up to the perfection of wisdom arisen from maturation, through the clairvoyances arisen from maturation, and the awakening path arisen from maturation, they perfect all the perfections and gain the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “To the extent that they have not held onto form, up to consciousness, up to have not held onto all dharmas—have not held onto the wholesome or unwholesome, ordinary or extraordinary, with outflows  or without outflows, compounded or uncompounded—then even when they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, the possessions and enjoyments in their buddhafield will not be held on to either. And why? Because all dharmas have not been held on to because nothing can be apprehended. 
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the perfection of wisdom by way of signlessness.”
This was the seventy-first chapter, “The True Nature of Dharmas That Cannot Be Apprehended,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 72: Teaching the Absence of Marks
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, given that dharmas are without causal signs, without effort, unadulterated, and empty of their own mark, how is it that bodhisattvas complete the cultivation of the six perfections—the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom? How are these dharmas without outflows labeled as different? How is there a variation between them? How is the perfection of giving included within the perfection of wisdom, and how are the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, and perfection of concentration included within the perfection of wisdom? Lord, how can such unmarked dharmas, dharmas that have but one mark—no mark—be different?”
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva  great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, standing in the five aggregates that are like a dream, give gifts, guard morality, cultivate patience, make a vigorous effort, become absorbed in meditative stabilization, and cultivate wisdom. Standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like an echo, they give gifts, guard morality, cultivate patience, make a vigorous effort, become absorbed in meditative stabilization, and cultivate wisdom. Standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like an apparition, like a mirage, like an illusion, and like a magical creation, they give gifts, guard morality, cultivate patience, make a vigorous effort, become absorbed in meditative stabilization, and cultivate wisdom. Those five aggregates are like a dream—that is, are without marks; they are like an echo, like an apparition, like a mirage, like an illusion, and like a magical creation—that is, are without marks. And why? Because a dream has no intrinsic nature at all; an echo, an apparition, a mirage, an illusion, and a magical creation have no intrinsic nature at all, and whatever has no intrinsic nature has no mark, and that which has no mark is, thus, as no mark, one mark. Therefore, Subhūti, you should thus know from this one of many explanations that the gift has no mark, the giver has no mark, and the recipient has no mark. 
 “Those who give a gift with such an understanding complete the perfection of giving. Completing the perfection of giving, they do not turn back from the perfection of morality, and do not turn back from the perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, or perfection of wisdom. Standing in those six perfections,  they complete the four concentrations, complete the four immeasurables, complete the four formless absorptions, complete the four applications of mindfulness, complete the four right efforts, and complete the four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, eightfold noble path, inner emptiness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the emptiness of its own mark. They complete the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization; they complete the eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, and five clairvoyances; they complete the five hundred dhāraṇī gateways; and they complete the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. 
 “Standing in those noble dharmas without outflows arisen from maturation, they go through miraculous power to world systems in the eastern direction and wait on the lord buddhas. They attend to the needs of those lord buddhas, and work for the welfare of beings there with their possessions. They gather into a retinue with giving those beings there who can be gathered with giving; they gather into a retinue by being moral those beings there who can be gathered with morality; they gather into a retinue by being patient those beings there who can be gathered by patience; they gather into a retinue by persevering those beings there who can be gathered with perseverance; they gather into a retinue by meditative stabilization those beings there who can be gathered with meditative stabilization; they gather into a retinue by wisdom those beings there who can be gathered with wisdom, up to and they gather into a retinue by all wholesome dharmas those beings there  who can be gathered with all wholesome dharmas. Endowed with those wholesome dharmas they even appropriate a life in saṃsāra, but they are not affected by the sufferings that exist in saṃsāra. They appropriate the things that make the life of humans and gods enjoyable for the sake of beings, and help those beings with those things that make life enjoyable. 
 “They know all dharmas have no mark. They know the result of stream enterer but do not remain standing there; they know the result of once-returner but do not remain standing there; they know the result of non-returner but do not remain standing there; they know the state of a worthy one but do not remain standing there; and they know a pratyekabuddha’s awakening but do not remain standing there. And why? It is because they, knowing all dharmas have no mark, have to reach the knowledge of all aspects not shared in common with śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, knowing all dharmas have no mark, know the six perfections have no mark, up to know all the buddhadharmas have no mark either. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like a dream, complete the perfection of morality; standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like an echo, like an apparition, like an illusion, like a mirage, and like a magical creation, they complete the perfection of morality. Understanding that the five appropriating aggregates are like a dream, and understanding that the five appropriating aggregates are like an echo, like an apparition, like a mirage, like an illusion, and like a magical creation, they complete the unflagging, unpunctured, unadulterated, unfragmented, untarnished,  autonomous, well-completed perfection of morality praised by the wise and belonging to the noble path without outflows. Standing there, they guard morality that comes from ordination vows, morality gained through the true nature of dharmas, restraint morality, proclaimed morality, and morality that comes through force of habit. But even though they are endowed with such morality as that, they do not grasp it as absolute, thinking, ‘On account of this may I be born sharing the good fortune of a great sāla tree–like royal family, or may I be born sharing the good fortune of a great sāla tree–like brahmin family, or a great sāla tree–like business family; or may I become a wheel-turning emperor, or a local ruler; or may I be born sharing the good fortune of the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, or may I be born sharing the good fortune of the Trāyastriṃśa gods, or may I be born sharing the good fortune of the Yāma, or Tuṣita, or Nirmāṇarati, or Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods; or may I reach the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening.’ And why? Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are marked by the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, so they have only one mark—that is, no mark—and a dharma that has no mark does not reach a dharma that has no mark. A dharma that has a different mark does not reach a dharma that has a different mark. And dharmas that have no marks or have different marks do not reach dharmas that have no marks or have different marks. 
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the perfection of morality that has no mark. Having completed the perfection of morality that has no mark,  they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, and having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva and gained the forbearance for dharmas that are not produced, they practice the knowledge of path aspects and acquire the clairvoyances arisen from maturation. Stationed in the five hundred dhāraṇī gateways, they acquire the four detailed and thorough knowledges, pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield, attend on the lord buddhas, bring beings to maturity, and take possession of a buddhafield. 
 “They stream through the five forms of life in the stream of cyclic existence but are not affected by the maturation of actions done when living in saṃsāra. 
 “To illustrate, a magical creation stands up, sits down, and lies down, but going, coming, remaining standing, sitting, and lying down are absent from it. It also works for the welfare of beings, even though it has no apprehension of beings or even the designation of a being. To illustrate further, a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, has turned the wheel of the Dharma and has led infinite beings into complete nirvāṇa in the two vehicles. But still, not seeing any bodhisattva at all whose unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening has been prophesied, that tathāgata throws off the volitional factor that is life, magically produces a magical creation, and passes into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. Subhūti, after many eons have gone by that magical creation, after having prophesied the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening of a bodhisattva, also passes into complete nirvāṇa. But no real form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness of that magical creation can be apprehended at all as a basis. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings too have no apprehension of beings or even the designation of a being  but still work for the welfare of beings. 
 “In that way, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the perfection of morality, all dharmas are included within that completion. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like a dream—in the five appropriating aggregates that are like an echo, like an apparition, like an illusion, like a mirage, and like a magical creation—complete the perfection of patience that has no mark. 
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the five appropriating aggregates without marks complete the perfection of patience? Here, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings complete the perfection of patience with two sorts of patience. What are the two? Starting from the first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, during that period, whether all beings come and snub, or humiliate, or refuse to associate with, or swear at them, or whether they deal them blows with sticks, clubs, and swords, bodhisattva great beings who want to complete the perfection of patience should not let even a single feeling of emotional upset arise: ‘Who is snubbing, or humiliating, or refusing to associate with, or swearing at me, or dealing me blows with sticks, clubs, and swords?’ And why? Because if they have forbearance for all dharmas without a mark, how could it occur to them to think, ‘Who is snubbing, or humiliating, or refusing to associate with, or swearing at me, or dealing me blows with sticks, clubs, and swords?’  When they examine like that, they complete the perfection of patience, and, by having completed the perfection of patience, they gain forbearance for dharmas that have not been produced.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, what is forbearance for dharmas that are not produced? How do you gauge it? What is knowledge?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, a dharma, even the tiniest one, is not produced. That is called the subject that is not produced. The forbearance for that is called knowledge. Through that knowledge, forbearance for dharmas that are not produced is gained.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, what is the difference between these two types of patience: the forbearance for dharmas that are not produced of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and the forbearance for dharmas of bodhisattva great beings?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, the knowledge and the abandonment of a stream enterer—that is a bodhisattva’s forbearance; the knowledge and the abandonment of a once-returner, the knowledge and the abandonment of a non-returner, and the knowledge and the abandonment of a worthy one—that is a bodhisattva great being’s forbearance; and the knowledge and the abandonment of a pratyekabuddha—that is a bodhisattva great being’s forbearance. That, Subhūti, is the difference between the forbearance of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas and the forbearance of bodhisattva great beings.
 “Subhūti,  the bodhisattva great beings who have such forbearance surpass all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. Remaining in the forbearance for dharmas that are not produced arisen from maturation, they pursue the bodhisattva’s path and complete the knowledge of path aspects. When they complete it, they are not separated from the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening and the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations. They are not separated from the five clairvoyances. Unseparated from the five clairvoyances, they bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield, and having brought beings to maturity and purified a buddhafield, with the wisdom of the unique single instant gain the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings complete the perfection of patience that has no mark.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like a dream, up to standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like a magical creation, make a vigorous attempt at physical effort and mental effort that have no marks. With physical effort, having accomplished miraculous power, they go to world systems in the ten directions and wait on the lord buddhas and work for the welfare of beings. With that physical effort they bring beings to maturity and establish them in the three vehicles. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete the perfection of perseverance that has no mark.
 “With mental effort without outflows, incorporated into the path, they complete the perfection of perseverance  included in which are these—namely, the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path, as well as the three gateways to liberation, four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—all wholesome dharmas. Practicing all these, bodhisattva great beings should complete the knowledge of all aspects. When they have completed it, all connections with residual impressions are eliminated. When those have been eliminated, they complete the perfect development that has no mark, and, having accomplished the power of meditative absorption, turn the wheel of the Dharma three times, a turning that has twelve aspects. On account of that turning the great billionfold world system in six ways shakes, shakes greatly, and shakes violently; quakes, quakes greatly, and quakes violently; resounds, resounds greatly, and resounds violently, pervading all the great billionfold world system with an illumination. That tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha emits a sound, a sound that causes listening, and the beings staying in the great billionfold world system hear that sound and they all become definite in the three vehicles. 
 “Subhūti, the perfection of perseverance of bodhisattva great beings is thus treated as very important. Standing in this perfection of perseverance,  bodhisattva great beings complete all the buddhadharmas and gain the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like a dream, complete the perfection of meditative stabilization, up to standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like a magical creation, complete the perfection of meditative stabilization. 
 “And how, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings standing in the five appropriating aggregates that are like a dream, up to like a magical creation complete the perfection of meditative stabilization? 
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom accomplish and dwell in the first concentration, up to accomplish and dwell in the fourth concentration, and accomplish and dwell in love, compassion, joy, equanimity, from in the station of endless space, up to the station of neither perception nor nonperception. They cultivate the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations, and except for a tathāgata’s meditative stabilization, and the meditative stabilization like a flash of lightning, the perfect meditative stabilization, and the vajropama meditative stabilization, having pervaded them with their bodies they accomplish and dwell in any śrāvaka meditative stabilization or pratyekabuddha meditative stabilization as appropriate, or any other of the host of meditative stabilizations as appropriate, but without relishing the meditative stabilization’s result. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings perceive that the mark of a meditative stabilization is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Just as a phenomenon that has no mark does not experience the taste of a phenomenon that has no mark, and just as a phenomenon that is a nonexistent thing does not experience the taste of a phenomenon that is a nonexistent thing,  since they do not experience anything, governed by which meditative stabilization will they take birth in the desire realm, or the form realm, or the formless realm? And why? Because they do not apprehend those realms and also do not apprehend someone who might become absorbed or that through which absorption might come about. Because they do not apprehend those, they complete the perfection of meditative stabilization that has no mark, and on account of that perfection of meditative stabilization pass beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels.”
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings, having completed the perfection of meditative stabilization that has no mark, pass beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels?”
 “Subhūti, it is because bodhisattva great beings have trained well in inner emptiness, up to have trained well in the emptiness of its own mark and do not apprehend in these emptinesses any dharma that they would stand on for the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, up to or the knowledge of all aspects. That emptiness too is empty, so by those emptinesses they pass beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels and enter into the flawlessness of a bodhisattva.”
 “Lord, what is a bodhisattva’s flaw and what is a bodhisattva’s flawlessness?”
 “Subhūti, all apprehending is the bodhisattva great beings’ flaw; all not apprehending is flawlessness.”
 “Lord, what is apprehending, and what is not apprehending?”
 “Bodhisattva great beings apprehend form;  bodhisattva great beings apprehend feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; they apprehend the eyes and form, and ears and sound, and nose and smell, and tongue and taste, and body and feeling, and the thinking mind and dharmas. Similarly, connect this with each, up to apprehend the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Subhūti, all not apprehending, fromformup to the knowledge of all aspects, even as something that can be talked about, is flawlessness. Why? Subhūti, it is because the intrinsic nature of form cannot be apprehended. The intrinsic nature of form is a nonexistent thing and cannot be talked about, up to the intrinsic nature of the knowledge of all aspects is a nonexistent thing and cannot be talked about. This, Subhūti, is the flawlessness of bodhisattva great beings. Those bodhisattva great beings, having entered into flawlessness, complete all the meditative stabilizations, but their birth is not dictated even by the completed absorption, so what need is there to say that their birth is not on account of greed, hatred, and confusion? It is impossible that they would occasion any action while under their influence, any action that would occasion birth from any of the four concentrations. On the contrary, standing in dharmas that are like an illusion, they work for the welfare of beings, without apprehending beings and without apprehending the illusion. Without apprehending anything they bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield. In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having completed the perfection of meditative stabilization, go on until they turn the wheel of the Dharma—that is, the wheel that cannot be apprehended. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  comprehend that all phenomena are like a dream, like an echo, like an apparition, like an illusion, like a mirage, and like a magical creation.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom comprehend that all phenomena are like a dream, and how do they comprehend that all phenomena are like an echo, like an apparition, like an illusion, like a mirage, and like a magical creation?” 
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are not the dreaming of a dream and are not the dreamers of a dream, are not the hearing of an echo and are not the hearers of an echo, are not the seeing of an apparition and are not those who see an apparition, are not the seeing of a mirage and are not those who see a mirage, and are not the seeing of a magical creation and are not those who see a magical creation. And why? Because a dream, echo, apparition, illusion, mirage, and magical creation are all error; they are all the error of ordinary people. A worthy one is not the dreaming of a dream and is not the dreamer of a dream, up to is not the seeing of a magical creation and is not the one who sees a magical creation. Similarly, connect this with each, up to a pratyekabuddha, and a bodhisattva, and even a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha is not the dreaming of a dream and is not the dreamer of a dream, up to is not the seeing of a magical creation and is not the one who sees a magical creation. And why? Because all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, are not produced, and are not existent. In regard to things that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, that are not thoroughly established, how could bodhisattva  great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom become those with the notion that they are existent things, or those with the notion that they are thoroughly established? It is impossible. And why? Because it would not be the perfection of wisdom if any phenomena were to have an intrinsic nature, be thoroughly established, or exist. 
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are not attached to form, up to are not attached to consciousness; are not attached to the desire realm, are not attached to the form realm, and are not attached to the formless realm; are not attached to the concentrations, deliverances, or absorptions; are not attached to the four applications of mindfulness, up to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; are not attached to the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, or wishlessness meditative stabilization; are not attached to the perfection of giving, and similarly, connect this with are not attached to the perfection of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, or wisdom. While practicing the perfection of wisdom they complete the first level, but they do not generate an attachment that wants to be there. And why? Because if they cannot apprehend that level, how could they generate an attachment that wants to be there? Similarly, up to they complete the tenth level, but they do not generate an attachment that wants to be there. And why? Because if they cannot apprehend that level, how could they generate an attachment that wants to be there? Even while practicing the perfection of wisdom they do not apprehend that perfection of wisdom. While practicing that nonapprehended perfection of wisdom, they see that all dharmas are included within that perfection of wisdom, but they do not apprehend those dharmas either. And why? Because those dharmas  and that perfection of wisdom are not two and are not divided. And why? Because there is no difference at all in those dharmas. According to the way the dharma-constituent is taught, suchness is taught, and the very limit of reality is taught, all dharmas are not broken apart.”
 “Lord, if all dharmas are unadulterated, how are wholesome and unwholesome dharmas taught, how are dharmas with outflows and without outflows taught, and how are compounded and uncompounded dharmas taught?”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, in the true dharmic nature of dharmas, is there anything at all, be it compounded or uncompounded, or be it the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or a buddhadharma that can be talked about?”
 “No, there is not, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, you should therefore know from this one of many explanations that all dharmas are thus unadulterated and that all dharmas have no marks, are not produced, and do not stop. 
 “Subhūti, earlier when I was practicing the bodhisattva’s practice I did not apprehend an intrinsic nature of any dharma at all, be it ‘form,’ or ‘feeling,’ or ‘perception,’ or ‘volitional factors,’ or ‘consciousness’; or . . . , up to ‘the compounded,’ or ‘the uncompounded’; or ‘the result of stream enterer’; or . . . , up to ‘awakening.’ 
 “In that way, Subhūti, starting from the first production of the thought up until fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,  bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should be skilled in the intrinsic nature of all phenomena by way of not apprehending anything at all. Bodhisattva great beings skilled in the intrinsic nature of phenomena complete the awakening path, bring beings to maturity, and purify a buddhafield. Stationed there, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, having led beings, one way or the other they lead them such that they do not suffer in the three suffering existences.
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train in the perfection of wisdom by way of the absence of marks.” 
This was the seventy-second chapter, “Teaching the Absence of Marks,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 73: Exposition of the Major Marks and Minor Signs and the Completion of Letters
The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then inquired of him, “Lord, how, when all dharmas are like a dream, have no basis, are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and are empty of their own marks, can you present these as wholesome and these as unwholesome, these as ordinary and these as extraordinary, these as with outflows and these as without outflows, these as compounded and these as uncompounded, as well as these for making manifest the result of stream enterer, these for making manifest the result of once-returner, these for making manifest the result of non-returner, these for making manifest the state of a worthy one, these for making manifest a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and these for making manifest unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? And similarly, up to how, when all dharmas are like an echo, like an apparition, like an illusion, like a mirage, and like  a magical creation; are nonexistent things; are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature; and are empty of their own marks, can you present these for making manifest unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here ordinary, unlettered simple folk apprehend a dream, apprehend a dreamer of a dream, up to apprehend a magical creation, and apprehend one who sees a magical creation. On account of apprehending a dream and apprehending a dreamer of a dream, up to on account of apprehending a magical creation and apprehending one who sees a magical creation, body, speech, and mind cause unwholesome volitional factors to come into being; body, speech, and mind cause wholesome volitional factors to come into being; and body, speech, and mind also cause good, bad, and immovable volitional factors to come into being. 
 “Therefore, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom standing in these two emptinesses—the emptiness of what transcends limits and the emptiness of no beginning and no end—teach beings that these three realms are empty. ‘Here there is no form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness, or aggregates, or constituents, or sense fields. They are a dream; they are an echo; they are an apparition; they are an illusion; they are a mirage; and they are a magical creation. Here there are no aggregates, or constituents, or sense fields. Here there is no dream and no dreamer of a dream, no echo and no hearer of an echo, no apparition and no one who sees an apparition, no mirage and no one who sees a mirage, and no magical creation and no one who sees a magical creation.  All these dharmas are nonexistent things and are only the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. But still, even though there are no aggregates there is the perception of aggregates, even though there are no constituents there is the perception of constituents, and even though there are no sense fields there is the perception of sense fields. All these dharmas are dependent origination, are arisen on account of error, and are appropriated because of the maturation of karma, so why do you persist with the perception of an existent thing even though dharmas are nonexistent things?’ 
 “Therefore, with skillful means bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom stop those beings who are stingy from being stingy and connect them with the perfection of giving. That charitable impulse of theirs makes them more and more wealthy. Having caused them to advance beyond that, they establish them in morality, and that morality of theirs that they have properly taken up leads them to be born in the heavens. Having caused them to advance even beyond that, they connect them with meditative stabilization and that meditative stabilization of theirs leads them to take birth in the Brahmaloka. Similarly, from the first concentration they connect them with the second concentration, from the second concentration with the third concentration, from the third concentration with the fourth concentration, and from the fourth concentration with the absorption in the station of endless space, with the absorption in the station of endless consciousness, with the absorption in the station of nothing-at-all, and with the absorption in the station of neither perception nor nonperception. In many ways they make them advance beyond giving and the result of giving and make them calm down and enter into the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, establishing them in it. They also make them advance beyond morality and the result of morality and in many ways make them calm down and enter into the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind,  establishing them in it. They also make them advance beyond absorption and the result of absorption and in many ways make them calm down and enter into the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, establishing them in it. Similarly, they make them calm down and enter into the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path, as well as the three gateways to liberation, eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, establishing them in them. With the dharmas without outflows that are formless, cannot be pointed out, and do not obstruct, they establish those yearning for the result of stream enterer in the result of stream enterer, establish those yearning for the result of once-returner in the result of once-returner, establish those yearning for the result of non-returner in the result of non-returner, establish those yearning for the state of a worthy one in the state of a worthy one, establish those yearning for a pratyekabuddha’s awakening in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and explain to, teach, motivate, excite, and establish those yearning for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening on the awakening path.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, that bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom  should present dharmas as dharmas that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, dharmas that are an emptiness of what transcends limits and an emptiness of no beginning and no end in such detail—‘These are wholesome dharmas and these are unwholesome dharmas, these are dharmas with outflows and these are dharmas without outflows, up to these are compounded dharmas and these are uncompounded dharmas’—is amazing, marvelous.” 
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! This presentation of dharmas by bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom is an amazing, marvelous dharma. Subhūti, when you understand how amazing and marvelous this dharma of bodhisattva great beings is, there is no case for it being easy for any śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas to pay back the bodhisattva great beings in kind for such help. Even all of you together would be incapable of surpassing those bodhisattva great beings with all the dharmas they have.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, what is that amazing, marvelous dharma of bodhisattva great beings that śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas do not have?”
 “Well then, Subhūti, listen well and pay attention and I will explain,” said the Lord. “Here bodhisattva great beings practicing this deep perfection of wisdom, standing in the six perfections arisen from maturation, standing in the five clairvoyances, thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, dhāraṇī gateways, and four detailed and thorough knowledges, having gone to world systems in the ten directions, help with giving those beings there who can be helped  by giving; help those who can be helped by morality, those who can be helped by patience, those who can be helped by perseverance, and those who can be helped by meditative stabilization; help with wisdom those who can be helped by wisdom; help those who can be helped by the first concentration, those who can be helped by the second concentration, those who can be helped by the third concentration, those who can be helped by the fourth concentration, those who can be helped by the absorption in the station of endless space, up to help with absorption in the station of neither perception nor nonperception those who can be helped by the absorption in the station of neither perception nor nonperception; help those who can be helped by love, those who can be helped by compassion, those who can be helped by joy, and those who can be helped by equanimity; help those who can be helped by the four applications of mindfulness, those who can be helped by the four right efforts, those who can be helped by the four legs of miraculous power, those who can be helped by the five faculties, those who can be helped by the five powers, those who can be helped by the seven limbs of awakening, those who can be helped by the eightfold noble path, those who can be helped by the emptiness meditative stabilization, those who can be helped by the signlessness meditative stabilization, and help with the wishlessness meditative stabilization those who can be helped by the wishlessness meditative stabilization.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing  this perfection of wisdom help beings who can be helped by giving with giving?”
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom give gifts. They give food to those begging for food, and drinks to those who want drink; they give transport, flower garlands, creams, incense, clothes, beds, pillows, up to whatever human requirements are appropriate. Just as they give to the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete Buddha, they also give in the same way to pratyekabuddhas, worthy ones, non-returners, once-returners, stream enterers, and similarly to those who have gone perfectly, and those who have set out perfectly, and similarly to those in human form, and similarly to those in the animal world—to all without any differentiation they give gifts. And why? Because they realize all dharmas are not different, so they give gifts that are not different, and by giving gifts that are not different they come to obtain a dharma that is not different, namely, the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Subhūti, if a bodhisattva great being sees a creature in the animal world and thinks, ‘The perfect, complete buddha is worthy of gifts, not a being born in the animal world,’ that is not a bodhisattva’s dharma. And why? Because, having produced a thought for awakening and thus set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, it never occurs to bodhisattva great beings that ‘these beings I should help with giving, these I should not help.’ Those the giving has helped take birth in great sāla tree–like royal families, and take birth in great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and great sāla tree–like business families.  Through just that, those helped by giving pass gradually, in the three vehicles, into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. 
 “Even if bodhisattva great beings are asked by many beings to kill themselves, they should definitely make that gift to those many beings, with a mind that is undisturbed, and should not produce any other state of mind, thinking, ‘Should I give or not give?’ And why? Because they have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the sake of those many living beings. Were they to be indecisive like that they would be open to the censure of the lord buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the pratyekabuddhas, the worthy ones, the trainees, and the world with its gods, humans, and asuras as well, saying, ‘Who are you that you would not rise up as a refuge, resting place, protector, and final ally of all beings?’
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when those in the form of humans or in the form of nonhumans ask bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom for a major or minor part of their bodies, they should not produce either one or the other of the thoughts ‘I should give’ or ‘I should not give.’ And why? Because bodhisattva great beings have intentionally appropriated a body for the sake of beings, thinking, ‘With this body I must work for the welfare of beings,’ and because they must produce the thought, ‘Those for the welfare of whom I have taken up this body should feel free to make off with it even without having asked.’ Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should train.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when seeing a beggar, bodhisattva great beings should think like this: ‘An intrinsic nature of all dharmas cannot be apprehended, so who is giving a gift, who is it being given to, and what is being given?’ And why?  Because those dharmas are absolutely empty, and emptiness does not give to anyone and also does not receive.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should train like that—that is, in inner emptiness, outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the emptiness of its own mark. Having stood in those emptinesses they give a gift that constantly and always becomes a complete perfection of giving, and because they have completed the perfection of giving, even while inside and outside dharmas are being chopped and cut into pieces, it does not occur to them to think, ‘Who is chopping and cutting me into pieces?’ 
 “Subhūti, here, looking down with my buddha eye on as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction I have seen bodhisattva great beings who have gone into the great hells and, having calmed those sufferings of hell, taught the doctrine to those beings in the hells by way of the three miracles—the miracle of miraculous powers, the miracle of foretelling, and the miracle of instruction. Having calmed the sufferings of hell with the miracle of miraculous powers, they teach the doctrine with the miracle of foretelling and the miracle of instruction. Those bodhisattvas have taught the doctrine with great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity, so those beings in the hells have faith in those bodhisattvas, will be freed from those hells, and from those hells, in the three vehicles, gradually put an end to suffering. Similarly, connect this with on as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the south, west, north, below and above, and in the intermediate directions.
 “Subhūti, here, looking down with my buddha eye  on the world, on as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction I have seen bodhisattva great beings waiting on the lord buddhas. Those bodhisattva great beings are waiting on the lord buddhas with intense faith, not without devotion but with devotion, not without pleasure but with pleasure, not without reverence but with reverence. Those bodhisattva great beings take up those doctrines the lord buddhas have taught them, and, having taken them up, they bear them in mind and until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, make sure they do not get lost. Similarly, connect this with on world systems in the south, west, north, below and above, and in the intermediate directions.
 “Subhūti, here, looking down with my buddha eye on as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction I have also seen bodhisattva great beings sacrificing themselves for the sake of beings in the animal world. There, those bodhisattva great beings chop off the major or minor parts of their bodies and strew them around in the main and intermediate directions. Those beings in the animal world eat the flesh of those bodhisattvas and come to feel love for those bodhisattvas. Feeling love for them they are freed from the animal world, and having been freed they serve the lord buddhas. While serving those lord buddhas they listen to the doctrine of those lord buddhas and, having listened to those doctrines, they practice them for suchness. They pass gradually in the three vehicles—the Śrāvaka Vehicle or Pratyekabuddha Vehicle  or Buddha Vehicle—into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. Thus, Subhūti, they are indeed a boon, these bodhisattva great beings who produce the thought to become unsurpassedly, perfectly, completely awakened, and, having produced it, also practice for suchness, and in the same way pass into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, here looking down with my buddha eye on as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River I have seen bodhisattva great beings alleviating the sufferings of the ghosts in the regions of ghosts. To stop miserliness they teach the doctrine, and that causes them to generate a feeling of love for those bodhisattva great beings. They are freed from the regions of ghosts because of that wholesome root. Having been freed they are never separated from the lord buddhas until they pass into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind. Thus, Subhūti, dwelling in compassion, bodhisattva great beings remain available for the welfare of all beings, that is, for their complete nirvāṇa. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, here looking down with my buddha eye I have seen bodhisattva great beings teaching the doctrine to the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, and teaching the doctrine to the Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods. Those gods, having heard the doctrine from those bodhisattva great beings, have passed into nirvāṇa, are passing into nirvāṇa, and will pass into complete nirvāṇa gradually in the three vehicles. Subhūti,  having caused the celestial mansions of those gods thrilled by the expanse of the five sorts of sense objects to burst into flames, they teach them the doctrine: ‘Friends, all compounded phenomena are impermanent, so who would have confidence in them?’
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, here looking down with my buddha eye on as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River I have seen bodhisattva great beings dissuading those who are attached to the view of Brahma from that view: ‘Hey, friends, all phenomena are empty, so how do you formulate a view? All phenomena ring hollow, so how do you formulate a view?’ Thus, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings dwelling in compassion teach the doctrine to beings. Subhūti, this is the amazing and marvelous dharma of bodhisattva great beings. 
 “Subhūti, here, looking down with my buddha eye on as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction I have seen bodhisattva great beings gathering humans with the four ways of gathering a retinue. What are the four? The ways of gathering are by giving gifts, kind words, beneficial actions, and consistency between words and deeds. 
 “How, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings gather a retinue of beings by giving? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings gather a retinue of beings by a twofold way of giving material gifts and the gift of Dharma. 
 “How, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings gather a retinue with gifts? They give gold, or silver, or jewels, or pearls, or beryl, or conch shells, or crystals, or corals, or food, or drink, or clothes, or transport, or beds, or seats, or perfume, or flowers, or garlands, or lamps, or a man  or a woman, or a horse, or a bull, or an elephant, or their own flesh, shouting out the words, ‘Hey humans! Come here! You must take and go with what you want without hesitation, with a feeling of benevolence, as if it is your own.’
 “Having given those gifts, they cause those beings to go for refuge to the Buddha, to go for refuge to the Dharma, and to go for refuge to the Saṅgha. Some they cause to take up the five-point training; some they cause to take up the eight-branched confession and restoration; some they establish in the ten wholesome actions; some they cause to take up the first concentration, up to the absorption in the station of neither perception nor nonperception; some they cause to take up love, compassion, joy, and equanimity; in some they enjoin mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of morality, mindfulness of giving away, mindfulness of the gods, and in some the perception of uncleanliness and so on in the examination of the body. Some they cause to be joined to the pure; some to the four applications of mindfulness, some to the four right efforts, some to the four legs of miraculous power, some to the five faculties, some to the five powers, some to the seven limbs of awakening, and some to the eightfold noble path; some to the emptiness gateway to liberation, signlessness gateway to liberation, and wishlessness gateway to liberation; some to the eight deliverances, some to the nine serial absorptions, and some to the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, and the four detailed and thorough knowledges; some to great love, and some to great compassion; some to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, some to the thirty-two major marks of a great person, and some to the eighty minor signs;  and some to the result of stream enterer, some to the result of once-returner, some to the result of non-returner, some to the state of a worthy one, some to a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and some to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom endowed with skillful means give material gifts and establish others in vast accomplishment and security. Subhūti, this is the amazing and marvelous dharma of bodhisattva great beings. 
 “How, Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom help beings by the gift of Dharma?
 “Subhūti, the gift of Dharma is these two: the ordinary and extraordinary. 
 “What, Subhūti, is the ordinary gift of Dharma? It is the explanation, teaching, and explication of the ordinary doctrines, namely, any of the ordinary doctrines that occur in the Uncleanliness Chapter,up to the four concentrations, the four practices of spiritual practitioners, the formless absorptions, and those shared in common with ordinary persons. This is called the ordinary gift of Dharma.
 “Subhūti, having given this gift of ordinary Dharma, those bodhisattva great beings move them away from taking to that as perfect in many ways, and having moved them away, establish them with skillful means in the noble dharmas and the results of the noble dharmas. 
 “What are the noble dharmas and the results of the noble dharmas? Subhūti, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening and the three gateways to liberation are called the noble dharmas. The result of stream enterer, up to the state of a worthy one are the results  of the noble dharmas.
 “Also, Subhūti, the knowledge of the result of stream enterer, up to the knowledge of the state of a worthy one, up to the knowledge of the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, up to the knowledge of the ten tathāgata powers, up to the knowledge of great love, knowledge of great compassion, knowledge of great joy, and knowledge of great equanimity, as well as—setting aside the knowledge of a knower of all aspects—those ordinary and extraordinary dharmas, with outflows and without outflows, and that are compounded and uncompounded—these are called a bodhisattva great being’s noble dharmas.
 “What are the results of a bodhisattva great being’s noble dharmas? This abandonment of all residual impression connections is called the result of a bodhisattva great being’s noble dharmas.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings gain the knowledge of all aspects?”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Bodhisattva great beings gain the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Well then, Lord, is there a distinction to be made between a bodhisattva great being and a tathāgata?” he asked.
 “A distinction is to be made,” he replied. “And what distinction is to be made? A bodhisattva great being gains the knowledge of all aspects, but a tathāgata is called one who has gained the knowledge. And why? Because having stood where a bodhisattva great being’s mind, and a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly and completely awakened one,  cannot be apprehended as different, they have gained the nondifferentiation of all dharmas.
 “Subhūti, this is the bodhisattva great beings’ ordinary gift of Dharma. Contingent on this there is the extraordinary gift of Dharma. Thus, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having guided all beings in the ordinary gift of Dharma, establish them with skillful means in the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Subhūti, what is the extraordinary gift of Dharma of bodhisattva great beings shared in common with foolish ordinary people? It is this: the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; the three gateways to liberation, eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten stations of complete immersion, eight stations of mastery, conflict-free meditative stabilization, knowledge from prayer, six clairvoyances, four total purities, ten controls, and ten tathāgata powers; the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the three a tathāgata does not have to guard against, the three applications of mindfulness, the natural state not robbed of mindfulness, and the elimination of obscuration from residual impressions; great compassion; and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, the knowledge of all aspects, the thirty-two major marks and eighty minor signs of a great person, the five dhāraṇī gateways, and the meditative stabilization gateways. These are not ordinary; they are called the extraordinary gift of Dharma.
 “Subhūti, what are the four applications of mindfulness? They are these: Enthusiastic, introspective, and mindful, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, they dwell viewing in a body the inner body;  enthusiastic, introspective, and mindful, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, they dwell viewing in a body the outer body; enthusiastic, introspective, and mindful, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression, they dwell viewing in a body the inner and outer body; they dwell in a body viewing arising; they dwell in a body viewing passing away; they dwell in a body viewing origination and passing away; and dwelling in a body without a fixed abode they do not appropriate anything in the world. Similarly, connect this with feelings, mind, and dharmas as well.
 “Subhūti, what are the right efforts? They are the generation of the desire not to produce wrong unwholesome dharmas that have not been produced; generation of the desire to abandon wrong unwholesome dharmas that have been produced; generation of the desire to produce wholesome dharmas that have not been produced; and generation of the desire that wholesome dharmas that have been produced will increase, not degenerate, and be completed.
 “Subhūti, what are the four legs of miraculous power? They are the leg of miraculous power endowed with meditative stabilization and the volitional effort caused by yearning, and the limbs of miraculous power endowed with meditative stabilization and the volitional effort caused by perseverance, concentrated mind, and examination.
 “Subhūti, what are the five faculties? They are the faith faculty, perseverance faculty, mindfulness faculty, meditative stabilization faculty, and wisdom faculty. These are called the five faculties.
 “Subhūti, what are the five powers? They are the faith power, perseverance power, mindfulness power, meditative stabilization power, and wisdom power. These are called the five powers.
 “Subhūti, what are the seven limbs of awakening? They are the right mindfulness limb of awakening, right examination of dharmas limb of awakening, right perseverance limb of awakening, right joy limb of awakening,  right pliability limb of awakening, right meditative stabilization limb of awakening, and right equanimity limb of awakening. These are called the seven limbs of awakening.
 “Subhūti, what is the eightfold noble path? It is right view, right idea, right speech, right conduct, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right meditative stabilization. This is called the eightfold noble path.
 “Subhūti, what are the three meditative stabilizations? They are the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization. 
 “What is the emptiness meditative stabilization? That one-pointedness of mind as an empty appearance and as an isolated appearance is called the emptiness meditative stabilization.
 “What is the signlessness meditative stabilization? That one-pointedness of mind as a calm appearance and as an appearance without causal signs is called the signless meditative stabilization.
 “What is the wishlessness meditative concentration? That one-pointedness of mind as an appearance of impermanence and as an appearance of suffering is called the wishless meditative stabilization.
 “Subhūti, what are the eight deliverances? With form they see form. This is the first deliverance. With the perception of form inside they see form outside. This is the second deliverance. Having directly experienced the pleasant deliverance with the body, they perfectly accomplish and dwell in it. This is the third deliverance. Totally transcending perceptions of form, setting to rest perceptions of obstruction, not paying attention to perceptions of difference, thinking ‘it is endless space,’ this perfect accomplishment and dwelling in the station of endless space, up to this perfect accomplishment and dwelling in the station of neither perception nor nonperception are the fourth to seventh deliverances,  and having totally transcended the station of neither perception nor nonperception, having focused on the cessation of perception and feeling with the body, this perfect accomplishment and dwelling is the eighth. These are called the eight deliverances.
 “Subhūti, what are the nine serial absorptions? There someone detached from sense objects, detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas, perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the first concentration that has applied thought and has sustained thought and joy and happiness born of detachment, and similarly, perfectly accomplishes and dwells in . . . , up to the second concentration, third concentration, and fourth concentration, up to perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the station of neither perception nor nonperception, and, having totally transcended the station of neither perception nor nonperception, perfectly accomplishes and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling. They are called the nine serial absorptions.
 “What are the ten stations of complete immersion? Immersion into earth, immersion into water, immersion into fire, and immersion into wind; immersion into blue, immersion into yellow, immersion into red, and immersion into white; immersion into space and immersion into consciousness—these are called the ten stations of complete immersion.
 “What are the eight stations of mastery? Those with a perception of form inside see small, beautiful, and ugly forms outside. They master and know, and master and see those forms. They become those with such a perception. This is the first station of mastery. 
 “Those without a perception of form inside see big, beautiful, and ugly forms outside. They master and know, and master and see those forms. They become those with such a perception. This is the second station of mastery. 
 “Those without a perception of form inside see blue shapes, blue in color, that look blue, and shine out blue—for example, flax flowers  and fine cloth from the Vārāṇasī region that are blue in shape, blue in color, look blue, and shine out blue. Similarly, without a perception of form inside, this seeing of blue shapes, blue in color, that look blue, and shine out blue is the third station of mastery. 
 “Those without a perception of form inside see yellow shapes, yellow in color, that look yellow, and shine out yellow—for example, bayur tree flowers and fine cloth from the Vārāṇasī region that are yellow in shape, yellow in color, look yellow, and shine out yellow. Similarly, without a perception of form inside, this seeing of yellow shapes, yellow in color, that look yellow, and shine out yellow is the fourth station of mastery. 
 “Those without a perception of form inside see red shapes, red in color, that look red, and shine out red—for example, bandhujīvaka flowers and fine cloth from the Vārāṇasī region that are red in shape, red in color, look red, and shine out red. Similarly, without a perception of form inside, this seeing of red shapes, red in color, that look red, and shine out red is the fifth station of mastery. 
 “Those without a perception of form inside see white shapes, white in color, that look white, and shine out white—for example, the color of the planet Venus and fine cloth from the Vārāṇasī region that are white in shape, white in color, look white, and shine out white. Similarly, without a perception of form inside, this seeing of white shapes, white in color, that look white, and shine out white is the sixth station of mastery. 
 “Totally transcending perceptions of form, setting to rest perceptions of obstruction,  not paying attention to perceptions of difference, thinking ‘it is endless space,’ this perfect accomplishment and dwelling in the station of endless space is the seventh station of mastery.
 “Totally transcending perceptions of form, setting to rest perceptions of obstruction, not paying attention to perceptions of difference, thinking ‘it is endless consciousness,’ this perfect accomplishment and dwelling in the station of endless consciousness is the eighth station of mastery.
 “These are called the eight stations of mastery. 
 “What is conflict-free meditative stabilization? Based on concentration, the meditative stabilization that accomplishes the practice of bodhisattva great beings on account of which afflictions are not produced in other beings and other persons is called conflict-free.
 “What is knowledge from prayer? Having resorted to concentration, thinking, ‘I want to know,’ bodhisattvas want to know whatever knowledge or knowable thing there is in the three time periods. Having set their minds on it, arising from the concentration that prayer is fully answered. That knowledge of that knowable thing is called knowledge from prayer.
 “What are the six clairvoyances? The clairvoyant knowledge of miraculous power, divine eye clairvoyance, divine hearing clairvoyance, clairvoyant knowledge of the thought activity of beings, clairvoyant knowledge that recollects previous existences, and clairvoyant knowledge of the extinction of outflows—these are the six. 
 “What are the four total purities? The thoroughly purified basis, thoroughly purified objective support, thoroughly purified mind, and thoroughly purified knowledge—these are the four.
 “What are the ten controls? Control over lifespan, control over mind, control over necessities, control over action, control over birth, control over belief, control over prayer, control over magical powers, control over knowledge, and control over the Dharma—these are the ten.
 “Subhūti, what are the ten tathāgata powers? 
 “They accurately know the possible as possible, and accurately know the impossible as impossible.
 “They accurately know from the perspective of place and from the perspective of cause, the results of past, present, and future actions and the undertaking of actions. 
 “They accurately know the world with its various constituents and multiplicity of constituents.
 “They accurately know the multiplicity of active desires and various beliefs of other beings and other persons.
 “They accurately know the knowledge of higher and lower faculties of other beings and other persons.
 “They accurately know the path wherever it goes. 
 “They accurately know the defilement and purification of all concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions, and the emergence from them.
 “They recollect many prior states of existence—they recollect just one lifetime, up to recollect many states of existence together with their appearance and their location.
 “With their purified divine eye that far surpasses the human, they see beings who are dying and being born, and they see those beings who have bad physical, verbal, and mental behavior, who hold wrong views and speak ill of noble beings, and who, on the breakup of their bodies after death, tumble into and take birth in terrible catastrophic forms of life because of those causes and those conditions. And they see those beings who have good physical, verbal, and mental behavior, who hold right views and do not speak ill of noble beings, and who, on the breakup of their bodies, take birth among the gods in good forms of life in the heavenly worlds because of those causes and those conditions. So, with their purified divine eye that far surpasses the human they accurately know, exactly in accord with the action, their deaths and rebirths, ugly  and beautiful bodies, and terrible forms and good forms of life.
 “They accurately know the extinction of outflows, the nonexistence of outflows, a mind that is freed, and a wisdom that is freed. These are called the ten tathāgata powers.
 “Subhūti, what are the tathāgatas’ four fearlessnesses? 
 “When I claim, ‘I am perfectly completely enlightened,’ ah! I see no causal sign that would make me think anyone in this world of beings together with the gods, Māra, Brahmā, those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins could in truth argue with me there that ‘these dharmas have not become perfectly completely awakened.’ Because I do not see any causal sign, I, who have found happiness, found fearlessness, and found a ground for self-confidence, claim the exalted status of the dominant bull. I roar the lion’s perfect roar in the assembly. I, Brahmā-like, turn the wheel that a god or Māra or Brahmā or one leading a secluded religious life or a brahmin—no one in this world—can in truth turn. 
Similarly, connect this with: “When I claim, ‘I have put an end to outflows,’ no one could in truth argue with me there that ‘you have not put an end to those outflows.’ 
 “About those dharmas I have explained to be hindrances, no one could in truth argue with me that ‘even having resorted to them, those dharmas do not hinder.’ 
 “And about the noble paths that I have said perfectly put an end to suffering and cause escape, I see no causal sign that would make me think that anyone in this world of beings together with the gods, Māra, Brahmā, those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins could in truth argue with me that ‘even if they have been resorted to, they do not put an end to outflows.’ Because I do not see any causal sign here, I have found happiness, found fearlessness,  found a ground for self-confidence, and claim as my state the exalted state of the dominant bull. I roar the lion’s perfect roar in the assembly. I, Brahmā-like, turn the wheel that a god or Māra or Brahmā or one leading a secluded religious life or a brahmin—no one in this world—can in truth turn.
 “These are called the four fearlessnesses.
 “Subhūti, what are the four detailed and thorough knowledges of the tathāgatas? They are detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings, detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas, detailed and thorough knowledge of creative explanations, and detailed and thorough knowledge of confidence giving a readiness to speak. Again, what are they? They have meanings as objective support, dharmas as objective support, creative explanations as objective support, and confidence giving a readiness to speak as objective support.
 “Subhūti, what are the three things the tathāgatas do not have to guard against? The tathāgatas’ physical behavior is completely pure. They do not have to be concerned about impure physical behavior, so the tathāgatas do not conceal it, thinking, ‘I hope nobody else finds out.’ This is the first thing they do not have to guard against. The tathāgatas’ verbal behavior is completely pure. They do not have to be concerned about impure verbal behavior, so the tathāgatas do not conceal it, thinking, ‘I hope nobody else finds out.’ This is the second thing they do not have to guard against. The tathāgatas’ mental behavior is completely pure. They do not have to be concerned about impure mental behavior, so the tathāgatas do not conceal it, thinking, ‘I hope nobody else finds out.’ This is the third thing they do not have to guard against. These are the three things they do not have to guard against.
 “What are the tathāgatas’ three applications of mindfulness? When a tathāgata teaches, some listen respectfully and attentively with a mind disposed to the words, and practice Dharma in full conformity with the Dharma. Still, a tathāgata does not take delight in that, does not feel mental happiness,  their spirits are not boosted. This is the first application of mindfulness.
 “When a tathāgata teaches, others do not listen respectfully, are inattentive and without a mind disposed to the words, and do not practice Dharma in full conformity with the Dharma. Still, a tathāgata is not deeply offended, is not impatient, and is not distrustful. This is the second application of mindfulness.
 “When a tathāgata teaches, some listen respectfully and attentively with a mind disposed to the word, and practice Dharma in full conformity with the Dharma, while others do not listen respectfully, are inattentive and without a mind disposed to the words, and do not practice Dharma in full conformity with the Dharma. Still, a tathāgata both does not take delight in and is not deeply offended by that. They remain dispassionate to all, mindful and introspective. This is the third application of mindfulness.
 “What is the tathāgatas’ natural state not robbed of mindfulness? That on account of which the lord buddhas do not miss an opportunity to work for the welfare of beings, based on their teaching a meaningful doctrine, is called the natural state not robbed of mindfulness.
 “What is the tathāgatas’ elimination of obscuration from residual impressions? Even though all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas have eliminated afflictions, they still have odd physical mannerisms. Even those do not happen with the tathāgatas. That is called the elimination of obscuration from residual impressions.
 “What is the tathāgatas’ great compassion? Based on the conventional term for the world, that compassion of the tathāgatas, endowed with which they think about the world at all times (three times in the day and three times at night) in order to find out about the wholesome roots—that compassion of the lord buddhas that is always operating, watching to bring limitless beings to maturity, is called great compassion.
 “Subhūti, what are the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha? From when they have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, up to up until, in that interim, the tathāgatas do not trip up,  do not shout out, are not robbed of mindfulness, do not discriminate differences, do not have uncollected thoughts, are not inconsiderately dispassionate, are not deficient in yearning, are not deficient in perseverance, are not deficient in recollection, are not deficient in meditative stabilization, are not deficient in wisdom, and are not deficient in liberation. All physical actions are preceded by knowledge and informed by knowledge, all verbal actions are preceded by knowledge and informed by knowledge, all mental actions are preceded by knowledge and informed by knowledge; they see past time with knowledge free from attachment and free from obstruction, they see future time with knowledge free from attachment and free from obstruction, and they see the present time with knowledge free from attachment and free from obstruction. These are called the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.
 “Subhūti, what is the tathāgatas’ knowledge of all aspects? It has a nonexistent thing as its objective support, mindfulness as its dominant factor, calmness as its aspect, and the absence of a mark as its mark—that is called the knowledge of all aspects.
 “Subhūti, what are a tathāgata’s thirty-two major marks? They (1) have wheel marks on the surfaces of their hands and feet, (2) feet that are well placed, (3) hands and feet with connecting webbing, and (4) delicate and soft feet and hands. (5) Their body stands out prominently in seven ways; (6) they have long toes and fingers, (7) stretched-out heels, (8) a big and straight body, (9) lower legs from the feet up that are not knobby, (10) body hair that points upward, (11) calves like the aiṇeya antelope, (12) and tubular and long arms; (13) their private parts are hidden in a sheath; (14) they have a color like gold, (15) and extremely fine skin; and (16) each strand of body hair grows curling to the right. (17) An ūrṇā marks their face, (18) their upper body is like a lion’s, (19) their shoulders are well rounded, (20) the part between the collarbones is filled in, (21) they know tastes as tasty, (22) they have a build like an Indian fig tree, (23) and they have an uṣṇīṣa on the top of their head, (24) a long thin tongue, (25) a voice like Brahmā, (26) lion-like jaws, (27) very white teeth, (28) even teeth, (29) teeth without gaps, (30) forty teeth, and (31) dark blue eyes (32) with eyelashes like a cow’s.
 “The tathāgatas have, on the palms and soles of their feet and hands, wheels with a thousand spokes, with rims and hubs complete in every respect, for example, like shapes carved in bone or ivory, so they (1) have wheel marks on the surfaces of their hands and feet. They place the soles of their feet evenly on the ground, without arching, so (2) their feet are well placed. Webbing connects the fingers and toes on their hands and feet, like the royal swan, so (3) they have hands and feet with connecting webbing. Their hands and feet are delicate like a wisp of cotton thread, and soft like those of a young prince, so (4) they have delicate and soft feet and hands. The backs of their hands and upper parts of their feet, shoulders, neck, and head declare their prominence, so (5) their body stands out prominently in seven ways. Their toes and fingers stretch out, so they (6) have long toes and fingers. Their heels are big, so they (7) have stretched-out heels. At seven hasta they are elevated in height and are not crooked, so (8) they have a big and straight body. Their ankles and knees do not appear at all, so (9) their lower legs from the feet up are not knobby. Their body hairs rise up curling to the right in rings, so (10) their body hair points upward. They have spherical calves like the calves of the black antelope and calves of the arrow-seed antelope, so (11) they have calves like the aiṇeya antelope. Without bending they can touch their knees with the palms of their hands, so (12) they have tubular and long arms. Their magnificent organ for excreting is hidden in a sheath, as in the case of a thoroughbred horse or a bull elephant, so (13) their private parts are hidden in a sheath. They have a color like that of highly refined gold, so (14) they have a color like gold. Their skin, like highly burnished silver and gold, is smooth without dirt particles sticking to it, so (15) they have extremely fine skin.  Each of their perfectly spaced body hairs grows by itself without a second, so (16) each strand of body hair grows curling to the right. Between their eyebrows, white in color like a kuṇḍa moon, cow’s milk, and frost, brighter than even the light of a hundred suns and moons, is an ūrṇā ornament, so (17) an ūrṇā marks their face. Their chest is filled out, so (18) their upper body is like a lion’s. Their neck is thick and set attractively so (19) their shoulders are well rounded. Like a highly polished golden door panel they have a very broad chest, so (20) the part between the collarbones is filled in. Their tongue is unaffected by wind, bile, and phlegm, they are a connoisseur of different tastes, and their consciousness mirrors that, so (21) they know tastes as tasty. Their height is the same as the distance between their out-stretched arms, so (22) they have a build like an Indian fig tree. There is a spherical, heaped-up topknot going around to the right, well placed and beautiful to behold on the top of their head, so (23) they have an uṣṇīṣa on the top of their head. Being the color of the petal of the red lotus and lengthy, (24) they have a long thin tongue. They have the voice of Hiraṇyagarbha and the call of the kalaviṅka bird, so (25) they have the voice of Brahmā. They have jaws like a circular mirror, well established, spherical, elongated, beautiful, and compact, so (26) they have lion-like jaws. They have teeth that are extremely white like the jasmine flower, the moon, and a broken, shining piece of conch-shell, so (27) they have very white teeth; teeth that are not too long or too short, so (28) they have even teeth; no spaces between their teeth, so (29) they have teeth without gaps; and no extra or missing upper or lower teeth, so (30) they have forty teeth. The dark and white sides are not mixed, are extremely clear and unflecked with red, so (31) they have dark blue eyes. The upper and lower eyelashes incline but are not entangled, so (32) the Tathāgata’s eyelashes are like those of a cow. 
 “There, (1) they have wheel marks on the surfaces of their hands and feet because they have welcomed and accompanied gurus,  listened to the doctrine, offered flower garlands, visited temples, reliquaries, and so on, and have made the gift of being in the circle of servants. It is a sign presaging an extremely large circle of servants. (2) Their feet are well placed because their commitment is firm. It is a sign presaging that they cannot be swayed. (3) They have hands and feet with connecting webbing because of their assiduous practice of the four ways of gathering a retinue by giving gifts, kind words, beneficial actions, and consistency between words and deeds. It is a sign presaging the speedy gathering of a retinue. (4–5) Their hands and feet are tender and soft, and their body declares its prominence in seven ways because they have offered perfectly prepared hard and soft food and drink. Both these are signs that presage obtaining perfectly prepared hard and soft food and drink. (6–8) They have long toes and fingers, stretched-out heels, and a big and straight body because they have freed convicts condemned to death, have sustained life by giving food and drink and so on, and assiduously practiced abstaining from killing. These are signs presaging long life. (9–10) They have lower legs from the feet up that are not knobby, and their body hair points upward because they have undertaken wholesome dharmas and cause those they have taken up to flourish and never decline. Both these are signs that presage the Dharma will not degenerate. (11) They have calves like the aiṇeya antelope because, having shown respect, they have made crafts and branches of knowledge available and caused them to be taken up. It is a sign presaging a speedy grasp of things. (12) They have tubular and long arms because they never said no; when asked for their own existent wealth, they gave it. It is a sign presaging control over giving and disciplining. (13) Their private parts are hidden in a sheath because they did not separate from each other those friends, close relatives, and kinsmen who were united together, they reconciled those who had fallen out, they undertook to live in chastity, and they guarded the secret mantras. It is a sign presaging  a great many sons. (14–15) They have a color like gold and extremely fine skin because they have given away fine mattresses, clothes, and coats, and mansions, palaces, and dwelling places. Both these are signs that presage the acquisition of such fine mattresses, clothes, and coats, and mansions, palaces, and dwelling places. (16–17) Each strand of body hair grows curling to the right, and an ūrṇā marks their face because they have avoided society, and because, having accorded an appropriate status to their spiritual superiors—their preceptors, teachers, parents, brothers and sisters, and so on—they have served them, given them gifts, and pleased them. Both these are signs that presage being without an equal. (18–19) Their upper body is like a lion’s and their shoulders are well rounded because they do not talk nonsense, do not belittle others, speak kind words, are eloquent and not jarring, and their speech is the same as the roar of a lion. Both these are signs that presage they cannot be bested. (20–21) The part between the collarbones is filled in and they know tastes as tasty because they have given the sick medicine, been their attendant, given food in accord with the diagnosis, and nursed them. Both these are signs that presage not being harmed. (22–23) They have a build like an Indian fig tree and an uṣṇīṣa on the top of their head because of giving to others in a surpassing way, first doing the work and conveying their enthusiasm to others for parks, assembly halls, places for others to get away from the heat, wells, makeshift bridges for places hard to reach, food, flower garlands, monasteries, hostels, and so on. Both these are signs that presage holding the highest office. (24–25) They have a long thin tongue and the voice of Brahmā because for a long time they have spoken with a smooth, kindly, and agreeable voice. Both these are signs that presage the acquisition of a melodious sound endowed with the five branches that make it suitable for discourse. The five branches that make a melodious sound suitable for discourse are these: understandable and recognizable,  worth listening to and not discordant, deep and reverberating, not grating and easy on the ear, and non-upsetting and clear. (26) They have lion-like jaws because for a long time they have refrained from babbling nonsense and spoken in a timely manner. It is a sign presaging speech worth listening to. (27–28) They have very white teeth and even teeth because they attended to the needs of others, did not look down on them, and their livelihood was pure. Both these are signs that presage a retinue that has already been assembled. (29–30) They have teeth without gaps and have all forty teeth because for a long time they made it a habit to tell the truth and not speak behind anybody’s back. Both these are signs that presage an undivided retinue. (31–32) They have dark blue eyes and a cow’s eyelashes because their eyes were without greed and hatred and free from confusion, so even while being embraced and belittled they saw exactly what was going on. Both these are signs that presage polite speech. 
 “Subhūti, those are a tathāgata’s thirty-two major marks of a great person. They shine with their natural light pervading a great billionfold world system, even an infinite number of world systems if they want that. Out of compassion the tathāgatas make a halo extending the length of their outstretched arms appear to beings. Were the lords not to have made a halo extending the length of their outstretched arms appear, even the light of the sun and the moon, eclipsed by the natural light, would not appear and there would be no months, fortnights, days, or years. The natural melodious sound resounds in a great billionfold world system. Two, three, and as many as four are pervaded with an illumination if they want that, and the melodious sound resounds in that many too.
 “Subhūti, what are a tathāgata’s eighty minor signs? Lord buddhas have minds free from attachment to all compounded phenomena so (1) they have nails  with a color like copper. Lord buddhas have minds intent on the happiness and welfare of all beings, whom they love as if they were close relatives, so (2) they have nails that are glossy. Lord buddhas have been born in the line of a high-status family so (3) they have nails that are high, not sunken. There is no basic immorality in the conduct of the lord buddhas so (4) their toes and fingers are rounded. Lord buddhas have accumulated vast wholesome roots so (5) their toes and fingers are large. Lord buddhas have gradually achieved success with wholesome roots so (6) their toes and fingers are tapering. The physical, verbal, and mental occupation and livelihood of lord buddhas are hidden so (7) the veins [on their hands] do not show. Lord buddhas have unraveled the knots of the afflictions so (8) their veins are without knots. The intentions of the lord buddhas’ doctrine are hidden so (9) their anklebones do not show. Lord buddhas cause freedom from all difficulties so (10) their feet are not the same. Lord buddhas are lions among humans so (11) they go with the stride of lions. Lord buddhas are elephants among humans so (12) they go with the gait of elephants. Lord buddhas are like royal swans going into the sky so (13) they go from place to place like swans. Lord buddhas are like head bulls among persons so (14) they go with the gait of a head bull. Lord buddhas have an advantageous path so (15) they walk keeping things worthy of respect to the right. Lord buddhas look handsome so (16) they have a beautiful walk. Lord buddhas have minds that are never crooked so (17) they do not zigzag. Lord buddhas proclaim the good qualities of purified behavior so (18) they have an attractive body. Lord buddhas have cleansed away all wrong, so (19) they have a polished body. Lord buddhas teach the Dharma gradually, so (20) the body that conveys them is gradual. Lord buddhas are endowed with cleanliness of body, voice, and mind so (21) the body that conveys them is clean. Lord buddhas are naturally gentle souls so (22) they have a body that is soft. Lord buddhas have naturally pure minds so (23) they have a body that is pure. Lord buddhas have a completely developed Dharma and Vinaya so (24) they have fully developed sex organs. Lord buddhas have proclaimed big, beautiful qualities so (25) their whole body is big and beautiful. Lord buddhas have the same thought about all beings so (26) they walk at an even pace. Lord buddhas teach an extremely gentle Dharma so (27) they have a body with a very youthful color. Lord buddhas have minds that are never dejected so (28) they carry themselves without slouching. Lord buddhas have pulled up unwholesome roots so (29) they have a body that has spread out. Lord buddhas are not linked up with further existences, they have finished with them, so (30) their body is compacted together. Lord buddhas have taught well the main and subsidiary branches of dependent origination so (31) all their limbs are well proportioned. Lord buddhas have extremely clear vision so (32) their sight is undistorted and clear. Lord buddhas have students who are well behaved so (33) they have fully rounded abdomens. Lord buddhas have cleaned away the faults of saṃsāra so (34) they have thin waists. Lord buddhas have conquered the summits of pride so (35) their bellies are not stretched. Lord buddhas have prevented the Dharma from running out so (36) their bellies are not emaciated. Lord buddhas are aware of the extremely deep dharmas so (37) they have deep navels. Lord buddhas have students who are candidates for taking up what is advantageous so (38) they have navels that swirl to the right. Lord buddhas have a community of students who are very attractive so (39) they are very attractive. Lord buddhas have extremely pure minds so (40) their habitual activities are pure. Lord buddhas teach a Dharma and Vinaya free from dark instructions so (41) their bodies are free from freckles. Lord buddhas teach a Dharma for gaining a body light like a wisp of cotton so (42) their hands are extremely soft like a wisp of cotton. Lord buddhas love close relatives and common people equally and have attained the state of a mahāśramaṇa so (43) the lines on their hands are vivid. Lord buddhas remain in an extremely deep and constant state so (44) the lines on their hands are deep. Lord buddhas have proclaimed a doctrine of wide-ranging tolerance so (45) the lines on their hands are long. Lord buddhas have promulgated a code of moral training that is not too long, so (46) their mouths are not too wide. Lord buddhas have taught that all worlds are like a reflection in a mirror so (47) the reflections of shapes appear in their faces. Lord buddhas are first easy on people when they lead them so (48) their tongues are pliable. Lord buddhas are endowed with an abundance of subtle good qualities so (49) their tongues are thin. With the Dharma that is hard to fathom, lord buddhas discipline simple folk with their attachments so (50) their tongues are red. Lord buddhas were not scared by things like the trumpeting of elephants and rumble of thunder so (51) they trumpet like elephants and rumble like thunder. Lord buddhas  have students whose conversations have a melodious, pleasing, gentle sound so (52) they have a voice that is melodious, pleasing, and gentle. Lord buddhas have turned back from the fetters to suffering existence so (53) their eyeteeth are tubular. Lord buddhas are skilled in disciplining people who have a keen intellect so (54) their eyeteeth are sharp. Lord buddhas have a Dharma and Vinaya that is extremely pure so (55) their eyeteeth are very white. Lord buddhas are located at an equal level so (56) their eyeteeth are even. Lord buddhas have demonstrated the clear realizations in a series so (57) their eyeteeth taper. Lord buddhas stand on the prominent mountain of wisdom so (58) they have a prominent nose. Lord buddhas have people whose Vinaya is clean so (59) they have a nose that is unsullied. Lord buddhas have clear vision so (60) they have completely cleansed eyes. Lord buddhas are endowed with the extremely wide range of buddhadharmas so (61) they have eyes that are wide. Lord buddhas have hosts of beings packed around them so (62) their eyelashes are thick. Lord buddhas are delighted by the finest among the young gods, asuras, and humans, the black and whites of whose eyes are striking, like delightful lotus petals with black and white sections, so (63) they have delightful eyes like lotus petals with black and white sections. Lord buddhas always teach the vast so (64) their eyebrows extend a long way. Lord buddhas, by being gentle, are skilled in the Vinaya so (65) they have smooth eyebrows. Lord buddhas have knowledge of all faults from every side so (66) their eyebrows have hairs of equal length. Lord buddhas have disciplined beings whose mindstreams have been moistened by the moisture of wholesome roots so (67) their eyebrows are glossy. Lord buddhas teach the supremely extensive Dharma so (68) their ear-lobes are full and long. Lord buddhas have won the battles over afflictions so (69) their ears are equal in size. Lord buddhas discipline beings with unimpaired mindstreams so (70) they have an unimpaired faculty of hearing. Lord buddhas have eliminated everything made into a wrong view so (71) their foreheads are perfectly developed. Lord buddhas have crushed the brahmins, those following a secluded religious life, and those advancing the arguments of the opposing side so (72) they have a war elephant’s broad forehead. Lord buddhas have fully carried out their highest vow so (73) their heads are very large. Lord buddhas have turned away from objects of the senses that attract ordinary people like bees who delight in one flower after the other so (74) the hair on their heads is like black bees. Lord buddhas have caused the residual impressions eliminated by seeing and meditation to diminish so (75) their hair is thick. Lord buddhas have a gentle heart to know the essentials of the doctrine so (76) their hair is soft. Lord buddhas have minds that are never disturbed so (77) their hair is not tousled. Lord buddhas never speak harshly so (78) their hair is not bristly. Lord buddhas accomplish what is advantageous to people with the fragrance of the flowers of the limbs of awakening so (79) their hair has a fragrant smell. And (80) lord buddhas have palms of the hands and soles of the feet adorned with the śrīvatsa, svastika, and nandyāvarta symbols. Subhūti, those are the eighty minor signs on a tathāgata’s body. 
 “It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings gather beings by the twofold way of giving material gifts and the gift of Dharma. Subhūti, this is the amazing and marvelous dharma of bodhisattva great beings. 
 “Subhūti, how do  bodhisattva great beings gather beings by kind words? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings gather beings with the six perfections—the perfection of giving, perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings gather being with those six perfections, by kind words. And why? Because all wholesome dharmas are included in these six perfections. 
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings gather beings by beneficial actions?
 “They have gathered beings for a long time with those same six perfections, which is to say, by giving gifts, kind words, beneficial actions, and consistency between words and deeds.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom give this advice and instruction to bodhisattva great beings: ‘Hey, sons of a good family! Come here! Become skilled at syllable accomplishment. Become skilled at one syllable, become skilled at two syllables, up to become skilled at forty-five syllables. Know through one syllable that all have a decline. Know through two that all have a decline. Know through three that all have a decline. Know through . . . , up to forty-five syllables that all have a decline. Meditate on forty-five syllables being included in one syllable. Meditate on one syllable being included in forty-five syllables.’ They give that advice.  Those bodhisattva great beings, Subhūti, are skilled at one syllable; are skilled at . . . , up to forty-five syllables; are skilled at meditation on forty-five syllables being included in one syllable; are skilled at one syllable being included in forty-five syllables; and, having made themselves skilled in syllable accomplishment, they are skilled in the accomplishment of that for which there are no syllables. To illustrate, Subhūti, it is just like tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. They are skilled in dharmas and skilled in syllables, and, being skilled in dharmas and skilled in syllables, teach the Dharma. Through letters they teach the Dharma for which there are no syllables. That Dharma, Subhūti, being the appearance of that for which there are no letters, is a magical creation.”
 Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, if, because of the emptinesses of what transcends limits and no beginning and no end, a being absolutely cannot be apprehended, a dharma also cannot be apprehended, and a dharma’s intrinsic nature cannot be apprehended, well then, Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom arisen from maturation, practicing the perfection of meditative stabilization, practicing the perfection of perseverance, practicing the perfection of patience, practicing the perfection of morality, practicing the perfection of giving, practicing the four concentrations, practicing the four immeasurables, practicing the four formless absorptions, practicing the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, practicing the fourteen emptinesses, practicing the signless, practicing the wishless, practicing the meditative stabilizations, practicing the eight deliverances, practicing the nine  successive absorption stations, practicing the ten tathāgata powers, practicing the four fearlessnesses, practicing the four detailed and thorough knowledges, practicing the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, practicing the thirty-two major marks and eighty minor signs of a great person, and practicing the six clairvoyances arisen from maturation teach the Dharma to beings? There a being and a designation of a being cannot be apprehended, and because a being cannot be apprehended, form also cannot be apprehended, up to consciousness cannot be apprehended, the six perfections cannot be apprehended, and similarly, up to the eighty minor signs cannot be apprehended, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha cannot be apprehended. Form is not apprehended in that being and designation of a being that do not exist, and similarly, up to the eighty minor signs are not apprehended. If the eighty minor signs are not apprehended, Lord, how then do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom teach the Dharma to beings? 
 “Lord, those bodhisattva great beings would be inspiring beings to take up dharmas that do not exist and would be connecting them with error, would they not? And why? Lord, it is because bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving do not apprehend even a bodhisattva, never mind the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening.”
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! Subhūti, a being, because it cannot be apprehended, should be known  as inner emptiness, should be known as outer emptiness, should be known as inner and outer emptiness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to should be known as the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. The aggregates should be known as emptiness, the constituents should be known as emptiness, the sense fields should be known as emptiness, and dependent origination should be known as emptiness. The emptiness of a self, emptiness of a being, emptiness of a living being, emptiness of a creature, emptiness of one born of Manu, emptiness of a person, and the emptiness of one who lives, and of one who does, one who makes someone else do, a motivator, one who motivates, one who feels, one who makes someone else feel, one who knows, and one who sees should be known as emptiness. Similarly, connect this with the concentrations should be known as emptiness, and the immeasurables, formless absorptions, and applications of mindfulness should be known as emptiness, up to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening should be known as emptiness, emptiness should be known as emptiness, and signlessness and wishlessness should be known as emptiness. Similarly, connect this with the emptiness of the eight deliverances, emptiness of the nine serial absorptions, emptiness of the ten tathāgata powers, emptiness of the four fearlessnesses, emptiness of the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and that of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha should be known as emptiness. The result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening should be known as emptiness. The level of a bodhisattva should be known as emptiness. A buddhafield should be known as emptiness. Awakening should be known as emptiness. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having thus seen that all those dharmas are empty, teach the doctrine to beings who have gone wrong.  They teach the doctrine so that in those emptinesses, one way or the other, they do not turn back. They see that all dharmas are without obscurations, do not make any dharma complicated, do not make a division, and teach the doctrine as it really is. 
 “To illustrate, a tathāgata’s magical creation magically creates many hundred million magical creations. It establishes one in giving; establishes another in morality; and establishes another in patience, another in perseverance, another in meditative stabilization, another in wisdom, another in the concentrations, another in the immeasurables, another in the formless absorptions, another in the applications of mindfulness, up to another in the eightfold noble path, up to and another in the knowledge of all aspects. It establishes one in the result of stream enterer, up to and establishes another in awakening. Subhūti, what do you think, on account of that magical creation has there been an increase in any dharma?”
 “No, Lord,” he replied.
 “Subhūti,” continued the Lord, “through this one of many explanations, you should know just how bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom teach the doctrine to beings, releasing them from errors by way of their not being bound and not being freed, and establishing them in things as they really are. And why? Subhūti, it is because form is not bound and is not freed; and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not bound and is not freed. Form’s state of not being bound and not being freed is not form; feeling’s . . . , perception’s . . . , volitional factors’ . . . , and consciousness’s state of not being bound and not being freed is not consciousness, up to compounded and uncompounded dharmas’ state of not being bound and not being freed is not compounded and uncompounded dharmas.  And why? Subhūti, it is because form . . . , up to consciousness . . . , up to compounded and uncompounded dharmas are absolutely pure.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom teach the doctrine to beings but do not apprehend them as beings. Furthermore, standing in a way that does not apprehend dharmas, bodhisattva great beings stand by way of not apprehending ‘form is empty,’ up to by way of not apprehending ‘consciousness is empty,’ up to by way of not apprehending ‘compounded and uncompounded dharmas are empty.’ 
 “Compounded and uncompounded dharmas are not located anywhere. And why? It is because they have no intrinsic nature where they might be located, so something nonexistent is not located in something nonexistent; something’s own existence is not located in something nonexistent; and something else’s existence is not located in something nonexistent or in something’s own existence. And why? Subhūti, it is because they all cannot be apprehended and what cannot be apprehended is not located anywhere. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom meditate on all those dharmas as empty. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that have not done anything wrong to the lord buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the pratyekabuddhas, the worthy ones, or any noble beings. And why? Subhūti, it is because the lord buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the pratyekabuddhas, the worthy ones, and all the noble beings understand just that true dharmic nature of dharmas, and having understood it teach the doctrine to beings  without going beyond that true dharmic nature of dharmas, because the dharma-constituent does not go beyond anything, and suchness and the very limit of reality do not go beyond anything either. Why? Because they have no intrinsic nature that goes beyond anything.” 
The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if, in the dharma-constituent, there is no going beyond, and in suchness and at the very limit of reality there is no going beyond, well then, Lord, is form one thing and the dharma-constituent another, suchness another, and the very limit of reality another? Is consciousness one thing and compounded and uncompounded dharmas, dharmas that are ordinary and extraordinary, and those with outflows and without outflows another?”
 “No, Subhūti,” he replied. “Form is not one thing and the dharma-constituent is not another. Suchness is not one thing and the very limit of reality is not another. Consciousness is not one thing, up to and all dharmas are not another. The dharma-constituent is not one thing and suchness and the very limit of reality are not another.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked further, “Lord, if form is not one thing and the dharma-constituent is not another, up to consciousness is not one thing, up to all compounded and uncompounded dharmas are not one thing, and similarly, up to and the dharma-constituent is not another, well then, Lord, how can you make a detailed presentation of the bad results of wicked dharmas as ‘the hells, the animal world, and the world of Yama,’  the good results of bright dharmas as ‘the gods and human beings,’ the wicked and bright results of wicked and bright dharmas as ‘a mixture of happiness and suffering,’ and the bright, not wicked, results of bright, not wicked, dharmas as ‘the result of stream enterer, result of once-returner, result of non-returner, state of a worthy one, pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening’?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, an exposition of a detailed presentation of results is simply based on conventional truth. An exposition of a detailed presentation of results is impossible as ultimate truth. And why? Because name and form are not produced and do not stop, are not defiled and not purified; those dharmas are undifferentiated, not something that can be talked about—that is, they are an emptiness of what transcends limits and an emptiness of no beginning and no end.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if the detailed presentation of results is based on conventional truth and does not exist ultimately, well then, Lord, would not simple, ordinary folk come to be in the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, were simple, ordinary folk to know the conventional truth or the ultimate truth,  well then, for them there would also be a detailed presentation of the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. If they were to know ‘the conventional truth’ or ‘the ultimate truth’ they would not be counted as simple, ordinary folk, but they do not have such comprehension, so for them there is no detailed presentation of the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Therefore, Subhūti, for simple, ordinary folk there is no path and there is no presentation of the path. Simple, ordinary folk do not cultivate the path so how could there be a presentation of the results? For noble persons there is a path and there is a presentation of the path. They cultivate the path so there is a presentation of the results as well.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, when they have become habituated to the path, does the result appear and do they attain the result?”
 “No, Subhūti. The result does not appear, and they do not attain the result from having become habituated to the path; nor, Subhūti, do they attain the result from having not become habituated to the path. They do not attain the result with the path and not with what is not the path, and not without standing on the path. It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom present the results in detail to beings but do not make a presentation of the results in a way that curbs the dharma-constituent.”
 “Lord, if the results  have not been presented in detail by curbing the compounded element and the uncompounded element, given that you, Lord, have said, ‘This is the result of stream enterer because three fetters have been eliminated; this is the result of once-returner because of a weakening of attachment to sense objects and malice; this is the result of non-returner because the fetters that are associated with living in the desire realm have been eliminated; this is the state of a worthy one because the five fetters that are associated with the upper realms have been eliminated; a pratyekabuddha’s awakening is to “every dharma qualified by origination, all of them, are subject to cessation”; and the elimination of all residual impression connections is perfect, complete awakening,’ then, Lord, how am I to understand what you have said, Lord, that ‘the results have not been presented in detail by curbing the compounded and uncompounded dharmas’?”
 “Subhūti,” asked the Lord in return, “is the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening compounded or are they uncompounded?”
 “They are uncompounded, Lord; they are uncompounded, Sugata,” he replied.
 “Subhūti, is there a curb on an uncompounded dharma?” asked the Lord.
 “No, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, when a son of a good family or daughter of a good family realizes that compounded or uncompounded dharmas have only one mark—that is, no mark—at that time do they curb any compounded or uncompounded dharma?”
 “No, Lord.” 
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom teach the doctrine to beings based on not curbing anything—that is, by way of inner emptiness, up to the emptiness of its own mark. They personally do not settle down on, and they do not cause others to settle down on, any dharma at all, be it the perfection of giving, or the perfection of morality, or the perfection of patience, or the perfection of perseverance, or the perfection of concentration, or the perfection of wisdom, or the first concentration, or . . . , up to the fourth concentration, or love, or compassion, or joy, or equanimity, or . . . , up to the station of neither perception nor nonperception, or the applications of mindfulness, or . . . , up to the eightfold noble path, or . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects. And because they do not settle down, they are not attached to anything. 
 “This is like a tathāgata’s magical creation. It also gives gifts, and also is not attached to any result except for the welfare of all beings—their passing into nirvāṇa—and also will not experience the result of giving. It does not stand in any dharma at all, up to the six perfections, up to in dharmas that are with outflows and without outflows, ordinary and extraordinary, and compounded and uncompounded. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom also practice all dharmas but do not stand in and are not attached to any dharma. And why? Because they have understood well what marks the dharmas as the dharmas.” 
This was the seventy-third chapter, “Exposition of the Major Marks and Minor Signs and the Completion of Letters,” of  “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 74: Exposition of the Sameness of Dharmas
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how have bodhisattva great beings realized well what marks dharmas as dharmas?” 
 “Subhūti, to illustrate, a magical creation has nothing to do with greed, hatred, and confusion; it has nothing to do with form, up to it has nothing to do with consciousness; and similarly, it has nothing to do with inner and outer dharmas, has nothing to do with bad proclivities and obsessions, has nothing to do with dharmas with outflows and without outflows, and has nothing to do with ordinary and extraordinary dharmas, those shared in common and not shared in common, or those that are compounded and uncompounded; and it has nothing to do with the path and has nothing to do with the results. To have realized well what marks the dharmas as being dharmas is like that.”
 “Lord, how do they meditate on the path of a magical creation?”
 “Subhūti, it is based on meditating on the path on account of which they are not defiled, are not purified, and do not appear in any of the five forms of life in saṃsāra.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings realize all dharmas that are nonexistent things?”
 “Subhūti,” asked the Lord in return, “is there any existent thing apprehended in a tathāgata’s magical creation, thanks to which it is defiled and is purified?” 
 “No, Lord. Lord, there is no existent thing apprehended in a tathāgata’s magical creation thanks to which it is defiled and is purified; there is no existent thing in the five forms of life in saṃsāra.” 
 “Subhūti, to have realized well what marks the dharmas as being dharmas is like that,” said the Lord.
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, is all form like a tathāgata’s magical creation? Are all feeling, all perception, all volitional factors, and all consciousness like a tathāgata’s magical creation?” 
 “Subhūti, all form is like a tathāgata’s magical creation. All feeling, all perception, all volitional factors, and all consciousness are like a tathāgata’s magical creation.”
 “Lord, if all are like a tathāgata’s magical creation, and if a magical creation has no form, has no feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, and has no defilement or purification, and if the five forms of life in saṃsāra from which beings will be liberated do not exist, how is there going to be a bodhisattva great being’s personal heroic power?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti,” asked the Lord, “earlier when bodhisattva great beings practiced the bodhisattva’s practice, did they apprehend any being to be liberated from hell, or the animal world, or the world of Yama, or from being a human or a god?” 
 “No, Lord.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Bodhisattva great beings do not apprehend any being to be liberated from the three realms. And why? Because they know, see, and are aware that all phenomena are  like an illusion and are like a magical creation.”
 “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings know, see, and are aware that all phenomena are like an illusion and are like a magical creation, then for whose sake do they practice the six perfections, four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and path to awakening; purify a buddhafield; and bring beings to maturity?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, if, just on their own, beings knew that all dharmas are like a dream and are like a magical creation, then bodhisattva great beings would not practice the bodhisattva’s practice for the sake of beings for incalculable eons either. But, Subhūti, beings do not know that all dharmas are like an illusion and are like a magical creation just on their own, so bodhisattva great beings, practicing the six perfections, bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if all phenomena are like a dream, like an apparition, like an illusion, like a mirage, and like a magical creation, where are beings such that by practicing the perfection of wisdom bodhisattva great beings cause them to advance beyond that location?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “beings are located in unreal names and causal signs, so, practicing the perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva great beings cause them to advance beyond names and causal signs.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, what is a name, and what is a causal sign?”
 The Lord said, “Subhūti, these—namely, name and causal sign—are names plucked out of thin air. And these—namely, name or causal sign, or form, or . . . , up to consciousness, or woman, or man, or boy, or girl, or hell, or animal world, or world of Yama, or god, or human, or compounded dharma, or uncompounded dharma, or result of stream enterer, or result of once-returner, or result of non-returner, or state of a worthy one, or pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening—are made-up name designations. Subhūti, the basic nature of all dharmas is name because they point somewhere. All compounded phenomena are just mere names. Simple, ordinary folk are attached to them, so bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom dissuade them with skillful means, saying, ‘You should not get attached to this word that has arisen when there is false imagination of the unreal, on account of false imagination, and which is empty of an intrinsic nature and without any real basis. The learned do not settle down on empty dharmas.’ Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means teach the Dharma to beings. 
 “What, Subhūti, is a causal sign? Subhūti, that to which simple, ordinary folk become attached is a causal sign. There are two. Which two? They are the causal sign of form  and the causal sign of the formless. 
 “Subhūti, what is the causal sign of form? Subhūti, here, given that all these dharmas are momentary, when there is grasping of any gross or subtle or exemplary or vile form at all through false imagination, that is said to be the causal sign of form. 
 “Subhūti, what is the causal sign of the formless? Subhūti, when affliction is generated through false imagination on account of having grasped any formless dharma at all as a casual sign, that is said to be the causal sign of the formless. 
 “Simple, ordinary folk become attached to them, so bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom detach them from those causal signs with skillful means and cause them to enter into the signlessness entity, establishing them there. One way or the other they cause them to enter into it and establish them in it in such a way that they do not fall into the duality of ‘this is a causal sign, and this is the absence of a causal sign.’ It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom detach them from causal signs with skillful means and cause them to enter into, and establish them in, the element of no signs.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if all dharmas end up as simply that—end up as simply the absence of a causal sign like that—then, Lord, how will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom become personally special on account of wholesome dharmas, and establish others as special on account of wholesome dharmas, complete level after level, and also cause beings to make a practice of them?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, if a causal sign were to be an existent thing, not a nonexistent thing,  then bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom would not become special on account of wholesome dharmas and would not establish others as special on account of wholesome dharmas. But, Subhūti, a causal sign is not an existent thing like that, it is a nonexistent thing. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom by way of signlessness bring the perfection of concentration to completion, by way of signlessness bring the perfection of perseverance to completion, and similarly, connect this with by way of signlessness bring the perfection of patience to completion, bring the perfection of morality to completion, and bring the perfection of giving to completion; bring the immeasurables, formless absorptions, and applications of mindfulness to completion; up to bring the eightfold noble path to completion; bring inner emptiness to completion, bring outer emptiness to completion, bring inner and outer emptiness to completion, and similarly, connect this with each, up to by way of signlessness bring the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature to completion; bring the deliverances to completion, bring the successive absorption stations to completion, and similarly, connect this with each, up to by way of signlessness bring the ten tathāgata powers to completion, up to bring the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha to completion. Having brought those wholesome dharmas to completion, they connect others with those wholesome dharmas as well, by way of signlessness. 
 “Subhūti, if any causal sign, even just posited as a part of the tip of a strand of hair, were to exist, and bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  were not to awaken fully to dharmas through the absence of a sign, the absence of mindfulness, and the absence of attention, they also would not establish beings in suchness just as it is, in all dharmas without outflows. Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are without outflows, without signs, without mindfulness, and without attention, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom work for the welfare of all beings through dharmas without outflows.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if all dharmas are without signs, without mindfulness, and without attention, well then, Lord, how do you enumerate ‘these are dharmas with outflows, these are dharmas without outflows; these are dharmas shared in common and these are dharmas not shared in common; these are śrāvaka dharmas, these are pratyekabuddha dharmas, these are bodhisattva dharmas, and these are buddhadharmas’?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord asked him in return, “What do you think, Subhūti, is signlessness one thing and śrāvaka dharmas another?” 
 “No, Lord.”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is signlessness one thing and pratyekabuddha dharmas another, is signlessness one thing and bodhisattva dharmas another, or is signlessness one thing and the buddhadharmas another?” 
 “No, Lord.” 
 “Well then, Subhūti, is signlessness itself the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, the pratyekabuddha dharmas, the bodhisattva dharmas, and a buddha?” 
 “That is so, Lord.”
 “By the same token, Subhūti, you should know that all dharmas are signless, so bodhisattva great beings training in all those signless dharmas grow on account of all wholesome dharmas—namely, grow on account of the six perfections, four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. 
 “And why? Because there is nothing bodhisattva great beings should train in other than training in dharmas that are emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness. 
 “And why? Subhūti, it is because all wholesome dharmas are included within these three gateways to liberation. Thus, the emptiness of its own mark is the emptiness gateway to liberation; the absence of a causal sign is the signlessness gateway to liberation; and the absence of occasioning anything is the wishlessness gateway to liberation. The bodhisattva great beings training in those three gateways to liberation train in the five aggregates, train in the twelve sense fields, train in the eighteen constituents, train in the four formless absorptions,  train in the four noble truths, train in the twelve links of dependent origination, train in inner emptiness, train in outer emptiness, train in inner and outer emptiness, up to train in the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, train in the four applications of mindfulness, up to train in the eightfold noble path, train in the ten tathāgata powers, and train in the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom train in the five appropriating aggregates?”
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are aware of form, which is to say, they are aware of how form arises, how form ceases, and of the suchness of form. 
 “How are they aware of form? They are aware that just as, for example, a mass of foam is without a core, similarly form also is full of holes, a conduit for waste water without any core at all.
 “How are they aware of the arising of form? Form does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere, so they are aware that the arising of form is like that, coming from nowhere and going nowhere. Subhūti, they are aware that the arising and passing away of form is like that, coming from nowhere and going nowhere.
 “How are they aware of the suchness of form? They are aware that there is no production, no cessation, no coming, no going, no defilement, no purification, no increase,  and no decrease in suchness. That is how they are aware of suchness. Furthermore, Subhūti, the way things are does not deviate from the way things are, that is why it is called suchness. In it there is no falsehood. That is also why it is called suchness. They are aware that the suchness of form is like that.
 “How are they aware of feeling? How are they aware of the arising of feeling? How are they aware of the passing away of feeling? How are they aware of the suchness of feeling? To illustrate, the arising and passing away of a water bubble is hollow. They are aware that feeling is like that. It does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere. They are aware that the arising and passing away of feeling is like that. How are they aware of the suchness of feeling? Suchness does not deviate from the way things are. They are aware that the suchness of feeling is like that.
 “How are they aware of perception? To illustrate, you absolutely cannot apprehend any water in a mirage. They are aware that a perception is like that. It does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere. They are aware that the arising and passing away of a perception is like that. How are they aware of the suchness of perception? They are aware that the suchness of perception is just like the suchness of feeling. 
 “How are they aware of volitional factors? To illustrate, if you peel away each of the layers of bark of a plantain tree, you cannot apprehend a core. They are aware that volitional factors are like that. How are they aware of the arising and passing away of volitional factors? They do not come from anywhere and do not go anywhere. They are aware that the arising and passing away of volitional factors is like that. How are they aware of the suchness of volitional factors? They are aware that the suchness of volitional factors is just like the suchness of feeling. 
 “How are they aware of consciousness? They are aware that consciousness is just like a mass of four-unit forces conjured up by a magician. It does not come  from anywhere and does not go anywhere. They are aware that the arising and passing away of consciousness is like that. How are they aware of the suchness of consciousness? They are aware that the suchness of consciousness is just like the suchness of feeling. Therefore, they are aware of the suchness of consciousness.
 “How do they know the constituents? 
 “As for the eye constituent, it is empty of an eye constituent’s intrinsic nature. They are aware that the eye constituent is like that. How do they know the form constituent? The form constituent is empty of a form constituent’s intrinsic nature. They are aware that the form constituent is like that. How do they know the eye consciousness constituent? The eye consciousness constituent is empty of an eye consciousness constituent’s intrinsic nature. They are aware that the eye consciousness constituent is like that. 
 “How are they aware of the ear constituent, sound constituent, and ear consciousness constituent . . . ; the nose constituent, smell constituent, and nose consciousness constituent . . . ; the tongue constituent, taste constituent, and tongue consciousness constituent . . . ; the body constituent, feeling constituent, and body consciousness constituent . . . ; and the thinking-mind constituent? The thinking-mind constituent is empty of a thinking-mind constituent’s intrinsic nature. They are aware that the thinking-mind constituent is like that. How do they know the dharma constituent? The dharma constituent is empty of a dharma constituent’s intrinsic nature. They are aware that the dharma constituent is like that. How do they know the thinking-mind consciousness constituent? The thinking-mind consciousness constituent is empty of a thinking-mind consciousness constituent’s intrinsic nature. They are aware that the thinking-mind consciousness constituent is like that. Therefore, they are aware of the eighteen constituents. 
 “How are they aware of the sense fields? The inner sense fields are empty of the inner sense fields’ intrinsic nature, and the outer sense fields are empty of the outer sense fields’ intrinsic nature. They are aware that the sense fields are like that. 
 “How are they aware of the noble truths? They are aware of the noble truth of suffering, and they are aware of the noble truths of origination, cessation, and the path. How are they aware of the noble truth of suffering? They are aware of it as suffering, aware of it as a truth, and aware that ‘it is truth for noble beings.’ They are aware that, freed from bifurcation and nondual, it is truth for noble beings. So too origination, so too cessation, and so too the path leading to the cessation of suffering as well—they are aware that these are truths for noble beings. 
 “How are they aware of the suchness of suffering? The suchness of suffering is exactly like that. That is how they are aware of the suchness of suffering. So too are they aware of the suchness of origination, cessation, and the path.
 “How are they aware of dependent origination? They are aware that a dependent origination is unproduced. Similarly, they are aware that a dependent origination does not cease, is not annihilated, is not eternal, is not one and is not many, does not come and does not go, and is without thought construction and at peace.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are aware in that way of those dharmas that are different from each other, well then, Lord, does that not complicate the dharma-constituent?”
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “it would be complicated if any other dharma not included in the dharma-constituent were to be apprehended, but, Subhūti, no other dharma not included  in the dharma-constituent is found, so no other dharma that might complicate the dharma-constituent can be apprehended. And why? Subhūti, it is because no other dharma not included in the dharma-constituent—none at all—is found by either a tathāgata or a tathāgata’s śrāvakas, so, since they have not apprehended it, they do not say, ‘There is some other dharma not included in the dharma-constituent that can be apprehended.’ Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should train in the dharma-constituent.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, in what are bodhisattva great beings training in the dharma-constituent trained?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings training in the dharma-constituent are trained in all dharmas. And why? Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are the dharma-constituent.”
 “Lord, why are all dharmas the dharma-constituent?”
 “Subhūti, it is because whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, this dharma-constituent of dharmas remains in an undifferentiated way. Subhūti, these—namely, all wholesome and unwholesome, and compounded and uncompounded dharmas—are the dharma-constituent. Therefore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom have trained in the dharma-constituent, they have trained in all dharmas.”
 The Lord having said that,  venerable Subhūti further inquired of him, “Lord, if all dharmas are the dharma-constituent, well then, Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom? Similarly, how should they train in the perfection of concentration, how should they train in the perfection of perseverance, how should they train in the perfection of patience, how should they train in the perfection of morality, and how should they train in the perfection of giving; and similarly, how should bodhisattva great beings train in the first concentration, and how should they train in the second concentration, third concentration, and fourth concentration; and similarly, how should they train in love, and how should they train in compassion, joy, and equanimity; and similarly, how should they train in the station of endless space, up to in the station of neither perception nor nonperception; and similarly, how should they train in the applications of mindfulness, and similarly, how should they train in the right efforts, legs of miraculous power, faculties, powers, limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; how should they train in emptiness, and how should they train in signlessness and wishlessness; how should they train in the eight deliverances, and how should they train in the absorptions; and similarly, how should they train in the ten tathāgata powers, and how should they train in the four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; how  should they train in order to accomplish the clairvoyances and the thirty-two major marks of a great person; how should they train in order to accomplish the eighty minor signs; how should they train in order to be born in great sāla tree–like royal families, how should they train in order to be born in great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and how should they train in order to be born in great sāla tree–like business families; how should they train in order to be born among the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, how should they train in order to be born among the Trāyastriṃśa gods, and how should they train in order to be born among the Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods, and among the Brahmakāyika gods, and among the Brahmapurohita, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, and Asaṃjñisattva gods; how should they train in order not to be born among them; how should they train in order to be born among the Śuddhāvāsa—the Avṛha, Atapa, Sudṛśa, Sudarśana, and Akaniṣṭha gods; how should they train in order to be born in the Ākāśānantyāyatana, up to in the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana; how should they train in the production of the first thought, and how should they train in the production of the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth thought; and how should they train at the śrāvaka level, how should they train at the pratyekabuddha level,  how should they train at the bodhisattva level, how should they train at bringing beings to maturity, how should they train at purifying a buddhafield, how should they train at the dhāraṇī gateways, how should they train in all the meditative stabilizations, and how should they train in the awakening path by training in which they will know all dharmas in all their aspects? Lord, these conceptualizations do not exist in the dharma-constituent, so would bodhisattva great beings not be practicing in error or else be engaging in thought construction where there is no thought construction? And why? Lord, because in the dharma-constituent those conceptualizations do not exist. Form is not the dharma-constituent, and feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are not the dharma-constituent; the dharma-constituent is not other than form, and the dharma-constituent is not other than feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. Just form is the dharma-constituent and just the dharma-constituent is form, up to just consciousness is the dharma-constituent and just the dharma-constituent is consciousness. Similarly, like the repetitive section for the inner dharmas, connect this with all dharmas.”
 Venerable Subhūti having inquired about that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! Subhūti, just form is the dharma-constituent, and just feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are the dharma-constituent; and just the dharma-constituent is form, and just the dharma-constituent is feeling, perception,  volitional factors, and consciousness. Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom were to see some other dharma not included in the dharma-constituent, they would not rest in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. So, because all dharmas are the dharma-constituent, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom therefore are aware of all dharmas as they really are, the dharma-constituent. But even though bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are aware of all dharmas as they really are, the dharma-constituent, still they teach the nameless dharmas with names and conventional terms: ‘this is form, this is feeling, this is perception, these are volitional factors, this is consciousness’; similarly, connect this with each, up to ‘this is awakening.’
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, a clever, well-trained magician or magician’s apprentice, having done some conjuring over a suitable material prop, might make various things appear—namely, a woman’s body, or a man’s body, or an elephant’s body, or a horse’s body, or a bull’s body, or a garden, or a delightful park, or a delightful river, or a delightful lotus pond. Having displayed various coverings, mats and carpets, there, they make flowers, flower garlands, and soft and hard food appear, and delight people with singing and music. They give gifts, or guard morality, or make a practice of being patient, or make a vigorous effort, or play  in the meditative stabilizations, or cultivate wisdom, or they exhibit there, in those sorts of ways, great sāla tree–like royal families, great sāla tree–like brahmin families, or great sāla tree–like business families; or they show the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, or show the axial mountain Sumeru, or show the Trāyastriṃśa gods, or show the Yāma, or Tuṣita, or Nirmāṇarati, or Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods; or show . . . , up to the formless Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana gods; or show those who are stream enterers, or once-returners, or non-returners, or worthy ones, or pratyekabuddhas; or show bodhisattvas—starting from those who have first produced the thought, are practicing the perfection of giving, and are practicing the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; those who are practicing on the first level, up to are practicing on the tenth level; those who are practicing in the secure state of a bodhisattva, and are accomplishing the clairvoyances and playing with them, bringing beings to maturity, purifying a buddhafield, and playing in the concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions; those who are giving away the major or minor parts of their bodies, undertaking the difficult practices, illuminating world systems, and accomplishing the ten tathāgata powers, and accomplishing the fearlessnesses, detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, and great compassion—or show a buddha’s body with all the major and minor limbs completed. When they do so, those beings with a naturally childish disposition  think about this and understand as follows: ‘Ah! This man has made such a display of these various bodies, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the buddha’s body that these people accept it as real. He is really well trained to somehow or other make it all beautiful and delightful.’ Those with a naturally intelligent disposition who are there, who are brilliant, wise, and endowed with the ability to investigate and reflect on those bodies, think about this and understand that, ‘Here there is nothing at all that can be apprehended, so this man is delighting those groups of beings with things that are not real. Thus they think what an amazing, marvelous Dharma that an understanding arises that these people are perceiving a materially existence in regard to these things where nothing materially exists at all.’
 “Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see any other dharma not included in the dharma-constituent, and it is true that while practicing the perfection of wisdom, they do not apprehend a being or the designation of a being, but still, endowed with skillful means they personally give gifts, establish others in giving, speak in praise of giving, and speak in praise of others giving gifts as well, welcoming it. They personally guard morality . . . , they personally make a practice of being patient . . . , they personally make a vigorous effort . . . , they personally also become absorbed in concentration . . . , and they personally also cultivate wisdom, establish others in wisdom, speak in praise of wisdom, and speak in praise of others cultivating wisdom as well, welcoming it. Similarly, connect this with: They personally take up the ten wholesome actions and they cause others to take up the ten wholesome actions, welcoming it. They personally take up  the five-point training, up to welcoming it; they personally observe the eight-branched confession and restoration, up to welcoming it; they personally accomplish and dwell in the first concentration, up to the fourth concentration, love, compassion, joy, and equanimity, and the station of endless space, up to the station of neither perception nor nonperception, up to welcoming it; they personally cultivate the applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path, up to the three gateways to liberation, eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and thirty-two major marks and eighty minor signs of a great person, up to welcoming it.
 “Subhūti, if the dharma-constituent were not exactly the same later as it was before, and if it were not like that in between as well, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom would not with skillful means speak about the dharma-constituent, bring beings to maturity, and purify a buddhafield. But, Subhūti, it is because the dharma-constituent is exactly the same later as it was before, and is like that in between as well—it is because of that, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means pursue the bodhisattva’s way of life for the sake of beings.” 
This was the seventy-fourth chapter, “Exposition of the Sameness of Dharmas,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 75: Exposition of Noncomplication
Then venerable Subhūti  asked the Lord, “Lord, if a being is absolutely not apprehended and even the designation of a being does not exist, for whose sake do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, having taken the very limit of reality as the measure, bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom. Subhūti, if the very limit of reality were to be one thing and the limit of beings another, bodhisattva great beings would not practice the perfection of wisdom. But, Subhūti, the very limit of reality is not one thing and the limit of beings another, therefore bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of beings. Subhūti, by not complicating the very limit of reality, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom establish beings at the very limit of reality.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if the very limit of reality is also the limit of beings, well then, how is a very limit of reality going to rest at the very limit of reality? Lord, if a very limit of reality rests at the very limit of reality, then in that case an intrinsic nature will rest in intrinsic nature. Lord, given that an intrinsic nature does not rest in intrinsic nature, how, Lord, are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom going to establish the limit of beings at the very limit of reality?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, it is true that a very limit of reality does not rest at the very limit of reality and an intrinsic nature does not rest in intrinsic nature, but still, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means establish the limit of beings at the very limit of reality without complicating the very limit of reality. Therefore, Subhūti, the very limit of reality is not one thing and the limit of beings is not another. The very limit of reality and the limit of beings are not two, are not divided, are not broken apart, and are not cut apart.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, what are the skillful means in possession of which bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means establish beings at the very limit of reality without complicating the very limit of reality?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here, starting from the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom establish beings in the perfection of giving. Having established them in the perfection of giving, while teaching the prior limit and later limit and midpoint of that giving, they teach, ‘Just as this giving’s prior limit and later limit are empty, and its midpoint is empty, so too this gift is empty, the giving’s result is empty, the benefactor is empty, and the recipient is empty. Son of a good family, since this is the case, do not suppose all those things exist at the very limit of reality; do not suppose the giving is one thing and the result of the gift another;  do not suppose the benefactor is one thing and the recipient another. Do not suppose, son of a good family, when you are giving that it is one thing and the result of the giving another, do not suppose the benefactor is one thing and the recipient another, and then, son of a good family, this giving of yours will be the elixir of immortality for both,  your giving will have the elixir of immortality as its result and will end up as the elixir of immortality. But you should not, on account of this giving, hold onto form, you should not hold onto feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. And why? Because this giving of yours is empty of an intrinsic nature of giving, its result is empty of an intrinsic nature of a gift, the benefactor is empty of an intrinsic nature of a benefactor, and the recipient is empty of an intrinsic nature of a recipient, so in emptiness giving cannot be apprehended, and neither can the result of giving, the benefactor, or the recipient. And why? Because those dharmas are utterly empty of an intrinsic nature.’ 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means establish beings in the perfection of morality, saying, ‘Come here, son of a good family. You must stop killing and must turn back from killing. Similarly, connect this with each, up to You must stop wrong view and must turn back from wrong view. That sort of intrinsic nature you have looked for in all those dharmas does not exist at all, so, son of a good family, reflect deeply on what those phenomena—the living being who is being killed and that with which the living being is being killed—are. Similarly, connect this with each, up to wrong view.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom in possession of such skillful means bring beings to maturity and teach them the result of giving and morality  —teaching them that the result of giving and morality is empty of an intrinsic nature, whereby those sons of a good family come to know that the result of giving and morality is empty of an intrinsic nature and do not settle down on it. In a state in which they do not settle down, they generate a state without distraction and generate wisdom; with that wisdom they cut off all bad proclivities and obsessions and pass into complete nirvāṇa in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind, but as an ordinary convention, not ultimately. And why? Because in emptiness no phenomenon can be apprehended that is passing into complete nirvāṇa or that has passed into complete nirvāṇa, and yet this—namely, the emptiness of what transcends limits—is still their complete nirvāṇa. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom see other beings and other persons who are emotionally upset and bearing malice toward each other, they give advice and instruction, saying, ‘Come here, son of a good family. All those dharmas on account of which you are bearing malice are empty of a basic nature. You both should have patience. You should get used to being patient. You should become the tolerant type. Hey! Reflect deeply on the fact that the object of malice, someone bearing malice, and that on account of which someone bears malice are all empty of a basic nature, and what is empty of a basic nature is never not empty. It is not made by tathāgatas, nor is it made by pratyekabuddhas, śrāvakas, bodhisattvas, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, kinnaras, mahoragas, Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods, Brahmās, up to Śubhakṛtsna, up to or those in the Śuddhāvāsa and Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana. Son of a good family, reflect deeply on the fact that the object of malice, someone  who is bearing malice, and that on account of which someone bears malice are all empty of an intrinsic nature. Emptiness does not bear malice to anyone at all.’ Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom in possession of such skillful means connect beings to the emptiness of a basic nature, they connect them to cause and effect as well. When they are connecting them to the emptiness of a basic nature, they excite and inspire them to take up and enter into it, and establish them in it, but as an ordinary convention, not ultimately. And why? Because in the emptiness of a basic nature something to be attained, someone who attains, and something on account of which someone attains—none of those phenomena can be apprehended. 
 “Subhūti, this very limit of reality where bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of beings is the emptiness of a basic nature. A being is not apprehended there, nor is the designation of a being apprehended there. And why? Because all phenomena are isolated from beings.’
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom see beings deficient in perseverance, they inspire them with skillful means to persevere physically and mentally, saying, ‘Son of a good family, in the emptiness of a basic nature there is nothing at all to get depressed about, no one who gets depressed, and nothing that causes depression. None of those phenomena  pass beyond the emptiness of a basic nature. Generate physical and mental effort and stop being lazy. Persevere at wholesome dharmas, namely, at giving or morality or patience or perseverance or concentration or wisdom; or at the concentrations or deliverances or meditative stabilizations or absorptions; or at the applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path; or at emptiness or signlessness or wishlessness, up to or at all the buddhadharmas. Observe, son of a good family, that these dharmas, as emptiness, do not present any problem. When dharmas do not present a problem, there is no depression at all.’
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means thus inspire beings to take up the emptiness of a basic nature, cause them to enter into it and establish them in it. One way or the other they thus establish them in nonduality. And why? Because the emptiness of a basic nature is not two and is not divided, and in nonduality there is no depression at all. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom give advice and instruction to beings, saying, ‘Come here, son of a good family. Persevere at giving or morality or patience or perseverance or concentration or wisdom; or at the applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path; or at the concentrations or deliverances or meditative stabilizations or absorptions; up to or the ten tathāgata powers or four  fearlessnesses or four detailed and thorough knowledges or great compassion; or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. Do not pay attention to those dharmas as dual and also do not pay attention to them as nondual. And why? Because all those dharmas are empty of a basic nature, and, given that they are empty of a basic nature, they cannot be paid attention to as dual and not dual.’ 
 “Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that with skillful means have practiced the practice, they bring beings to maturity. Having brought them to maturity, they gradually establish them in the result of stream enterer, establish them in the result of once-returner and in the result of non-returner, establish them in the state of a worthy one, establish them in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and establish them in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means working for the welfare of beings cause them to enter into the cultivation of meditative stabilization, saying, ‘Come here, son of a good family. You should cultivate meditative stabilization without entertaining the notion of distraction and without entertaining the notion of meditative stabilization. And why? Because all those dharmas are empty of a basic nature, and in the emptiness of a basic nature a dharma that is a distraction or that becomes one-pointed cannot be apprehended at all. When, having stood in this meditative stabilization, you practice the emptiness of a basic nature, whatever wholesome dharma you do with your body or speech or mind, regardless of what it is—if you give gifts, or guard morality, or make a practice of being patient, or make a vigorous effort, or become absorbed in meditative stabilization, or cultivate  wisdom; or practice the applications of mindfulness, up to or meditate on the eightfold noble path; or meditate on the gateways to liberation, or meditative stabilizations, or absorptions, or ten tathāgata powers, or four fearlessnesses, or four detailed and thorough knowledges, or great love, or great compassion, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, or the thirty-two major marks of a great person, or the eighty minor signs, or the śrāvaka path, or the pratyekabuddha path, or the bodhisattva path, or the buddha path, or the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or the knowledge of all aspects; or if you bring beings to maturity, or purify a buddhafield—whatever you do, you will accomplish those wholesome dharmas with little difficulty.’ 
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means work for the welfare of beings. Starting from the first production of the thought, they work for the welfare of beings by never doing what should not be done. They seek for the good, constantly and always passing on from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to attend on the lord buddhas, and until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they do not lose any of the doctrine they have heard from those lord buddhas, even after they have changed lives. They will have always acquired the dhāraṇīs, and their faculties—whether the body faculty or speech faculty or mind faculty—never become dull.  And why? Because they have constantly and always cultivated the knowledge of all aspects well, and by having cultivated the knowledge of all aspects well, they have cultivated all paths well, that is, they have cultivated the śrāvaka path, or pratyekabuddha path, or bodhisattva path, or buddha path well. The bodhisattva great beings have also cultivated the clairvoyances that help them not lose what they have heard. Remaining in those clairvoyances arisen from maturation, streaming through the five forms of life in the stream of cyclic existence but without degenerating, they work for the welfare of beings. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that stand in the emptiness of a basic nature and work for the welfare of beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, having stood in the emptiness of a basic nature, work with skillful means for the welfare of beings. Having cultivated the perfection of wisdom well they give advice and instruction to beings, saying, ‘Come here, son of a good family. Whatever acts you do physically or verbally or mentally, regardless of what they are, understand analytically that they are all empty of a basic nature so that those acts of yours will be the elixir of immortality, will have the elixir of immortality as their result, and will end up as the elixir of immortality. In the emptiness of a basic nature, a phenomenon that settles down or degenerates cannot be apprehended. And why? Because the emptiness of a basic nature does not degenerate and there is no phenomenon that degenerates from the emptiness of a basic nature.  And why? Because the emptiness of a basic nature is not a thing that really exists and not a thing that does not really exist either. Given that phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, what will degenerate?’ 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom give advice and instruction to beings like that, inspiring them to take up the emptiness of a basic nature, and while giving such advice and such instruction and causing them to enter into the emptiness of a basic nature, never do what should not be done. They personally are constantly and always inspired to take up the ten wholesome actions and they inspire others to take up the ten wholesome actions as well. Similarly, they personally pursue . . . , up to the five-point training and the eight-branched confession and restoration and inspire others to take up them up as well; they personally become absorbed in the first concentration and they inspire others to become absorbed in the first concentration as well; they personally become absorbed in . . . , up to the fourth concentration and they inspire others to become absorbed in . . . , up to the fourth concentration as well; they personally constantly and always abide in loving-kindness and they inspire others to take up the meditation on loving-kindness as well, up to they personally meditate on equanimity and they inspire others to take up the meditation on equanimity as well; they personally complete . . . , up to the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption and they inspire others to take up completion of the station of neither perception nor nonperception absorption as well; they personally meditate on the four applications of mindfulness and they inspire others  to take up meditation on the four applications of mindfulness as well, leading them to, causing them to enter, and establishing them in them; they personally meditate on . . . , up to the eightfold noble path and they inspire others to take up meditation on . . . , up to the eightfold noble path; they personally train in the ten tathāgata powers and they inspire others to take up training in the ten tathāgata powers as well, leading them to, causing them to enter, and establishing them in them; they personally train in accomplishing . . . , up to the eighty minor signs and they inspire others to train in accomplishing . . . , up to the eighty minor signs as well, leading them to, causing them to enter, and establishing them in them; they personally generate an understanding of the result of stream enterer but without themselves remaining there, and they establish others in an understanding of the result of stream enterer; they personally generate an understanding of . . . , up to the state of a worthy one but without themselves remaining there, and they establish others in an understanding of the state of a worthy one; they personally generate an understanding of a pratyekabuddha’s awakening but without themselves remaining there, and they lead and cause others to enter into an understanding of a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, establishing them in it; and they personally generate the path of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and give advice and instruction about that path to others, leading them to, causing them to enter, and establishing them in it. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that with skillful means never do what should not be done.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if all phenomena are empty of a basic nature, and if in the emptiness of a basic nature a being is not apprehended, nor are a dharma and a path apprehended, Lord,  how will bodhisattva great beings stand in the knowledge of all aspects?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! All phenomena are empty of a basic nature, and in the emptiness of a basic nature a being is not apprehended, nor are a dharma or a path apprehended. Subhūti, were all phenomena not empty of a basic nature, bodhisattva great beings would not stand in the emptiness of a basic nature and, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, teach the emptiness of a basic nature doctrine. But, Subhūti, form is empty of a basic nature. Subhūti, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are empty of a basic nature, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are empty of a basic nature, and the eighty minor signs are empty of a basic nature. Similarly, connect this with each, up to the knowledge of all aspects and abandonment of all residual impression connections are empty of a basic nature. Subhūti, given that all phenomena are empty of a basic nature, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom therefore teach the doctrine that ‘the five aggregates are empty of a basic nature’; teach the doctrine that ‘the twelve sense fields and eighteen constituents are empty of a basic nature’; and teach the doctrine that ‘the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, and four applications of mindfulness are empty of a basic nature.’ Similarly, connect this with each, up to teach the doctrine that ‘the eightfold noble path is empty of a basic nature’; teach the doctrine that ‘the three gateways to liberation,  eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, up to and the eighty minor signs are empty of a basic nature’; teach the doctrine that ‘the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and the knowledge of all aspects and abandonment of all residual impression connections are empty of a basic nature.’ 
 “Subhūti, if inner emptiness were not empty of a basic nature, then bodhisattva great beings would not teach the doctrine that ‘all dharmas are empty of a basic nature’; similarly, if outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature were not empty of a basic nature, bodhisattva great beings would not teach the doctrine that ‘all dharmas are empty of a basic nature.’ Therefore, the emptiness of a basic nature would have been destroyed.
 “But the emptiness of a basic nature does not perish, is not immovable, and is not nonrecurring. And why? Because it does not occupy a location, does not stand in a place, does not come from anywhere, and does not go anywhere. It is the establishment of dharmas. In it no dharma can be apprehended that increases or decreases, is accumulated or passes away, has been produced or ceased, is defiled or purified. It is the basic nature of dharmas. Having stood there, bodhisattva  great beings stand in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, but do not see any dharma at all as being destroyed. In regard to all dharmas, there is no establishment and there is no destruction. That is the establishment of dharmas as dharmas. Therefore, by seeing all dharmas as empty of a basic nature, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Because they do not see any dharma at all as obstructing. They see all dharmas as not obstructing. They thus do not apprehend in that emptiness of a basic nature a self, nor do they apprehend a designation of a self; nor do they apprehend a being . . . , a living being . . . , a creature . . . , one born of Manu . . . , a child of Manu . . . , one who lives . . . , a person . . . , one who does . . . , one who makes someone else do . . . , a motivator . . . , one who motivates . . . , one who feels . . . , one who knows . . . , or one who sees, nor do they apprehend a designation of one who sees; nor do they apprehend form . . . , feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , or consciousness, nor do they apprehend a designation of consciousness; similarly, they do not apprehend inner and outer dharmas, up to they do not apprehend the eighty minor signs, nor do they apprehend a designation of the eighty minor signs, so how could they ever harbor doubt about unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, were a tathāgata’s magical creation to have continuously taught the Dharma to a magically created monk or nun or layman or laywoman for as many as a hundred million eons, what do you think, Subhūti, would those magical creations  have the good fortune to reach the result of stream enterer, or to reach the result of once-returner or the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No, Lord. And why? Because they have no real basis.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! When all phenomena have no real basis, what being will bodhisattva great beings cause to take up the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner or result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? On the contrary, they cause creatures snared in error to enter into the absence of error and establish them there. Just that error is itself not error because of having thought construction as cause. The absence of thought construction is the absence of error. Where there is an absence of error there is no self, up to there is no one who knows and no one who sees. There, there is no form, there is no feeling, there is no perception, there are no volitional factors, and there is no consciousness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to, there is no awakening. And that in which there is no self, up to no one who knows and no one who sees; no form, no feeling, no perception, no volitional factors, and no consciousness; up to no awakening—that is the emptiness of a basic nature. Standing there bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom free beings subject to error from the perception of a being, free them from  the perception of form, up to the perception of the formless; similarly, connect this with each, up to, and free them from dharmas with outflows and without outflows. Those dharmas without outflows, furthermore, are these, namely, the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path, and the four formless absorptions, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha. They, furthermore, are not exactly like the ultimate there. Thus, the uncompounded, unproduced, nonexistent, and nonappearing—that is the emptiness of a basic nature; that is the awakening of the lord buddhas. There, there is no self, up to no one who knows and no one who sees; no form, no feeling, no perception, no volitional factors, and no consciousness; and similarly, connect this with each, up to no eighty minor signs. 
 “Except that the comprehension of the emptiness of a basic nature functions as a path, bodhisattva great beings have not set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. That emptiness of a basic nature, furthermore, is the emptiness of a basic nature at the prior limit, and the emptiness of a basic nature at the later limit, and is the emptiness of a basic nature at the midpoint too. It is never not an emptiness of a basic nature. Therefore, bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection that is the emptiness of a basic nature, practice the knowledge of path aspects in order to free beings from the perception of a being and from all perceptions.  When they practice the knowledge of path aspects, they practice all paths—namely, the śrāvaka path, pratyekabuddha path, and bodhisattva path. Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings, having completed all paths, brought beings to maturity, purified a buddhafield, and employed sustaining power over the volitional factor that is life, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and, even having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, do not make a break in the guiding principle of the buddhas—namely, the emptiness of a basic nature. Just this, namely, the emptiness of a basic nature, is the guiding principle of the buddhas—of the lord buddhas who will appear at a future time, and the lord buddhas presently dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in the ten directions, those lord buddhas teaching the Dharma. As for this emptiness of a basic nature, apart from appearing from the lord buddhas, it does not appear in the world from anything else, so bodhisattva great beings have to practice the perfections that are the emptiness of a basic nature, practicing in such a way that there is no decline from the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Subhūti said, “Lord, it is amazing how bodhisattva great beings practice without complicating the emptiness of a basic nature so that form is not one thing and the emptiness of a basic nature another; or feeling one thing, perception one thing, volitional factors one thing, or consciousness one thing and the emptiness of a basic nature another; and similarly, up to all the buddhadharmas and awakening one thing and the emptiness of a basic nature another. Form itself is the emptiness of a basic nature and the emptiness of a basic nature is form, up to awakening itself is the emptiness of a basic nature and the emptiness of a basic nature is awakening.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, if form were one thing and the emptiness of a basic nature another; feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness one thing and the emptiness of a basic nature another; and similarly, up to awakening one thing and the emptiness of a basic nature another, then, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings would not fully awaken to form as a knower of all aspects; would not fully awaken to feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness as a knower of all aspects; and similarly, up to not fully awaken to awakening as a knower of all aspects. But, Subhūti, it is because form itself is the emptiness of a basic nature and the emptiness of a basic nature is form; because feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness itself is the emptiness of a basic nature and the emptiness of a basic nature is consciousness; and similarly, up to awakening itself is the emptiness of a basic nature and the emptiness of a basic nature is awakening—because of that, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having become aware that form is empty of a basic nature, fully awaken to form itself as the knowledge of all aspects, up to having become aware that awakening is empty of a basic nature, fully awaken to awakening itself as the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “And why? Because no dharma at all has been destroyed or has remained unmoved, or will enter into anything. On the contrary, the world together with the gods, together with Māra, together with Brahmā, together with those leading a secluded religious life and the population of brahmins, do not know form as it really is; they do not know feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness as it really is. On account of not knowing, ordinary foolish people settle down on form, and they settle down on feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness. Settling down on form, and settling down on feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, they live grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine.’ Having settled down on grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine,’ they settle down on all inner and outer things. Having settled down, because the sense fields come with rebirth, they appropriate form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness and are not released from birth, old age, sickness, death, pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and grief; they are not liberated from the five  forms of life in the stream of cycles of existence. 
 “Therefore, having stood in the perfection that is the emptiness of a basic nature, bodhisattva great beings do not complicate form with ‘it is empty,’ or ‘it is not empty’; they do not complicate feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness with ‘it is empty,’ or ‘it is not empty’; and similarly, connect this with each, up to they do not complicate awakening with ‘it is empty,’ or ‘it is not empty.’ 
 “And why? Because the emptiness of form does not make it complicated with ‘this is form,’ and ‘this is emptiness,’ up to ‘this is consciousness,’ and ‘this is the emptiness of consciousness’; similarly, connect this with each, up to does not make it complicated with ‘this is awakening,’ and ‘this is the emptiness of a basic nature.’
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, space does not complicate space; inner space does not complicate outer space; and outer space does not complicate inner space. Similarly, Subhūti, the emptiness of a basic nature does not complicate form, and form does not complicate emptiness. Emptiness also does not complicate feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , or consciousness, and consciousness does not complicate emptiness, up to emptiness does not complicate awakening, up to awakening does not complicate emptiness.
 “And why? Because the ‘this is form,’ and ‘this is emptiness,’ up to ‘this is feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness,’ and ‘this is emptiness’; similarly, connect this with each, up to ‘this is awakening,’ and ‘this is emptiness’ that might make that sort of complication have no intrinsic existence.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, if all phenomena are not different things, well then, Lord, for what will bodhisattva great beings, thinking, ‘I will full awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ set out? Lord, awakening is not divided, and anyone who takes it as being within a duality cannot fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” replied the Lord. “Subhūti, awakening is not practiced within a duality. Subhūti, awakening is not two and is not divided. Subhūti, a bodhisattva great being’s awakening is not practiced within a division being made in awakening into ‘this is the bodhisattva’ and ‘this is the bodhisattva’s awakening.’ A bodhisattva great being’s awakening is not a practice of form; is not a practice of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness; up to is not a practice of awakening. 
 “And why? Because in awakening the word ‘I’ does not exist, so words for ‘I am practicing form,’ ‘I am practicing feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness,’ and ‘I am practicing awakening’ do not exist, because a bodhisattva great being’s awakening is not a practice of taking anything up and not a practice of not taking anything up.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if a bodhisattva  great being’s awakening is not a practice of taking anything up and is not a practice of not taking anything up, well then, of what is a bodhisattva great being’s awakening the practice?”
 The Lord asked in return, “What do you think, Subhūti, is the awakening of a tathāgata’s magical creation the practice of taking something up or of not taking something up?”
 “No, Lord,” he replied.
 “What do you think, Subhūti,” asked the Lord, “does the dream awareness of a worthy one practice taking something up or not taking something up?”
 “No, Lord,” he replied. “Given that worthy ones absolutely do not dream, however could their dream awareness practice taking something up or not taking something up?” 
 “Similarly, Subhūti,” said the Lord, “a bodhisattva great being’s awakening does not practice taking anything up or not taking anything up.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if a bodhisattva great being’s awakening is not a practice of taking anything up or not taking anything up, is not a practice of form, up to and is not a practice of the knowledge of all aspects, well then, Lord, having practiced the six perfections, having accomplished the ten levels, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the fourteen emptinesses, the three gateways to liberation, the concentrations, the deliverances, the absorptions, up to the ten tathāgata powers, and eighty minor signs, and having stood in the clairvoyances, completed the ten levels, entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva,  purified a buddhafield, and brought beings to maturity, how will bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to the knowledge of all aspects? Lord, without having practiced the six perfections, without having stood on the ten levels, up to without having stood in the clairvoyances, without having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva, without having purified a buddhafield, and without having brought beings to maturity, they will not be able to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say!” said the Lord. “Subhūti, without having stood on the ten levels, up to without having completed the six perfections and all the wholesome dharmas, they will not be able to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, but, Subhūti, when they have completed the ten levels, and they have completed the six perfections, the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, the four applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path, the three—emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness—gateways to liberation, up to the eighty minor signs, and the natural state not robbed of mindfulness, and the constant staying in a state of equanimity, they will be able to reach the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “Moreover, Subhūti, when they stand in the basic nature of form; stand in the basic nature of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to stand in the basic nature of awakening, they will be able to reach the knowledge of all aspects. Subhūti, that basic nature is calmed, and it does not bring about the accumulation or diminishing, production  or ceasing, defilement or purification, attainment or clear realization of any dharma at all. 
 “Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening simply based on the true nature of dharmas labeled by way of ordinary convention. In it there is ultimately no form or . . . , up to awakening, and no one who is practicing awakening. All those dharmas are simply labeled by ordinary convention, but not ultimately. 
 “Subhūti, starting from the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings do not, while practicing for awakening, apprehend that thought, beings, awakening, or a bodhisattva. What do you think, Subhūti, when you, Subhūti, in order to eliminate the view of the perishable collection, attained the faculties, or attained the uninterrupted meditative stabilization or the result of stream enterer, or attained the result of once-returner or the result of non-returner, or attained the state of a worthy one, did you apprehend a dream or a thought or a path or a result?
 “No, Lord.”
 “Well then, Subhūti, why was there a pronouncement about your understanding, ‘Subhūti has reached the state of a worthy one’?” 
 “Lord, the pronouncement about my understanding was based on ordinary convention.”
 “Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings are designated by ordinary convention; form is designated by ordinary convention; feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are designated by ordinary convention; up to the knowledge of all aspects  is designated by ordinary convention, so, based on the emptiness of a basic nature of dharmas, bodhisattva great beings do not apprehend any dharma in awakening that accumulates or diminishes or helps or harms any dharma. 
 “So, given that even the basic nature of dharmas has not been apprehended, why mention that a first production of the thought will not be apprehended; that the six perfections, up to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening will not be apprehended; or that the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization, up to the buddhadharmas will not be apprehended. It is impossible. 
 “Thus, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have practiced unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening work for the welfare of beings.” 
This was the seventy-fifth chapter, “Exposition of Noncomplication,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 76: The Armor for Bringing Beings to Maturity
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the six perfections, the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha still do not, having completed the fourteen emptinesses and the awakening path, have the good fortune to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, well then, Lord, how will bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?” 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom with skillful means, they practice the perfection of giving without apprehending giving, without apprehending a benefactor and recipient, and without practicing any dharmas other than those. It is then that the bodhisattva great beings embark upon the awakening path. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means like that will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Similarly, connect this with all the five perfections, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom make an effort at the awakening path?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means do not engage with and do not disengage from form. And why? Śāriputra, it is because there is no intrinsic nature of form to engage with or become disengaged from; up to they do not engage with and do not become disengaged from consciousness. And why? Because there is no intrinsic nature of consciousness to engage with or become disengaged from. They do not engage with and do not become disengaged from the perfection of giving. And why? Because it has no intrinsic nature to engage with or become disengaged from. Similarly, connect this with each, up to the perfection of wisdom and the eighteen  distinct attributes of a buddha.” 
 “Lord, if there is no intrinsic nature of a dharma to engage with or become disengaged from, well then, how will the perfection of wisdom in which bodhisattva great beings are supposed to train be accomplished? Without having trained in the perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva great beings will not be able to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Exactly so, Śāriputra, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! Without having trained in the perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva great beings will not be able to awaken fully to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, Furthermore, it is done with skillful means, not without skillful means. 
 “Śāriputra, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom were to apprehend an intrinsic nature of any dharma, they would grasp them. But they do not apprehend them, so there is no chance they will grasp at ‘this is the perfection of wisdom, this is the perfection of concentration, this is the perfection of perseverance, this is the perfection of patience, this is the perfection of morality, this is the perfection of giving, this is form,’ up to ‘this is consciousness,’ up to ‘these are the buddhadharmas.’ If they do not apprehend . . . , up to ‘this is awakening,’ what will they grasp? Śāriputra, the perfection of wisdom cannot be grasped, up to the buddhadharmas cannot be grasped. Śāriputra, this perfection is a perfection of the absence of grasping, so it is a perfection of wisdom.  Bodhisattva great beings should train in it. Given that bodhisattva great beings training in it do not apprehend even the training, what need is there to mention awakening, what need is there to mention the perfection of wisdom, what need is there to mention the bodhisattva dharmas, what need is there to mention the buddha dharmas, and what need is there to mention the śrāvaka dharmas, pratyekabuddha dharmas, or the dharmas of ordinary people? And why? Śāriputra, it is because whatever the dharma, its intrinsic nature does not exist, so, where all dharmas have no intrinsic nature, what dharmas of ordinary people are there, what stream enterer, once-returner, non-returner, worthy one, and pratyekabuddha dharmas; and what state of a worthy one, pratyekabuddha’s awakening, bodhisattva, or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? If those persons cannot be apprehended—those dharmas on account of which they say, ‘This is an ordinary person,’ up to ‘this is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’—however could those dharmas appear?”
 “Lord, given that all dharmas are without any real basis, what will be the origin and existence of ‘this is an ordinary person,’ up to ‘this is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked that, the Lord asked him in return, “Śāriputra, has there been or will there be a real basis of form in the way a foolish ordinary person has settled down on it?”
 “Lord, ‘form’ does not exist at all except that an ordinary person with a distorted mind has settled down on it.”
 “Śāriputra,  has there been or will there be a real basis of feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness in the way a foolish ordinary person has settled down on them? Similarly, connect this with Śāriputra, what do you think about this, has there been or will there be a real basis of . . . , up to all the buddhadharmas in the way a foolish ordinary person has settled down on them?”
 “Lord, up to ‘consciousness,’ and, up to ‘all the buddhadharmas’ do not exist at all except that an ordinary person with a distorted mind has mentally constructed them as a real basis.”
 “Exactly so, Śāriputra, exactly so!” said the Lord. “An ordinary person with a distorted mind has mentally constructed all dharmas, which have no real basis, with a mind that has no real basis, as real bases. Therefore, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means, having seen that all those dharmas are without a real basis, have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Śāriputra asked him, “Lord, what are those skillful means of bodhisattva great beings who see all dharmas without a real basis, those skillful means with which bodhisattva great beings have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see any dharma’s real basis, a real basis on account of which they might get angry; while angry get depressed; while depressed become despondent;  and while despondent become lazy. Therefore, Śāriputra, except for ‘aggregates,’ or ‘constituents,’ or ‘sense fields’ settled down on by beings confused about the self, all dharmas are without a real basis, without a vital essence, devoid of a vital essence, the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, empty of a basic nature, and empty of their own marks, so bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, having seen that all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, empty of a basic nature, and empty of their own marks, conjure up a body like a magician’s and teach the Dharma to beings. They give a discourse on giving to beings who are stingy, give a discourse on morality to beings who are immoral, give a discourse on patience to beings thinking malicious thoughts, give a discourse on perseverance to beings who are lazy, give a discourse on meditative stabilization to beings who are distracted, and give a discourse on the intellect to beings with intellectual confusion. When they have established beings in giving, up to established them in wisdom, they then give the noble discourses to do with deliverance to beings, causing them to reach the result of stream enterer, up to causing them to reach the state of a worthy one, causing them to reach a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, up to and causing them to reach the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then venerable Śāriputra asked the Lord, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  establish beings who do not exist and who are not there in giving, up to establish them in wisdom, and on top of that give noble discourses to do with deliverance, give discourses that cause them to reach the state of a worthy one, cause them to reach a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, up to and cause them to reach the knowledge of all aspects, so how could they not apprehend anything?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend anything. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend any being at all except as a conventional term in conventional usage. Śāriputra, standing there in the two truths, bodhisattva great beings teach the doctrine to beings. Nevertheless, in the two truths, Śāriputra, there is no apprehension of a being and no designation of a being. But still bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection with skillful means teach the doctrine to beings so that those beings do not apprehend a self even in this very life, never mind what they will obtain, or how they will obtain it. Śāriputra, it is thus that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means teach the doctrine to beings.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Śāriputra said to him, “Ah! Lord,  this is a great enthusiasm indeed, that bodhisattva great beings are armed with an armor like this—namely, Lord, that they do not apprehend any dharma at all as the same, or different, or separate; that they are armed with such an armor that they are not in the desire realm, are not in the form realm, are not in the formless realm, are not in the compounded element, and are not in the uncompounded element; and that they free beings from the three realms without apprehending a being or the designation of a being. In the absence of the designation of a being, a being is not bound and is not freed; since a being is not bound and is not freed, there is no defilement and there is no purification; since there is no defilement and there is no purification, forms of life do not have specific features; since forms of life do not have specific features, there is no karma and there are no afflictions; and given that there is no karma and there are no afflictions, however could there be a maturation, a maturation on account of which I and beings come to be in the five forms of life in the stream of cycles of existence?”
 Venerable Śāriputra having said that, the Lord replied to him, “Exactly so, Śāriputra, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! Śāriputra, if a being there before were not there later, there would thus be the fault that a bodhisattva and tathāgata ‘would have been there before and would not be there later’; and there would also be the fault that the five forms of life in the stream of cyclic existence would have been something that really existed before and would be something that really does not exist later. Therefore, Śāriputra, whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas  do not arise, the true dharmic nature of dharmas—suchness, unmistaken suchness—remains. In it there is no self, there is also no being, there is also no living being, there is also no person, there is also no one who does, and there is also no one who makes someone else do, so however could there be form there? However could there be feeling, perception, volitional factors, and however could there be consciousness? However could there be the five forms of life in the stream of cycles of existence from which beings are to be freed, given that dharmas do not exist and are not there?
 “Therefore, Śāriputra, these dharmas are the emptiness of an intrinsic nature. Having heard about this from earlier tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas, bodhisattva great beings have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, but there is no intrinsic nature of any dharma at all that can be apprehended in which they can believe, except what foolish ordinary people confused by distortion have settled down on. Bodhisattva great beings armed with such armor do not turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Armed with such armor they think, ‘It is not that I will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; rather, I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ and, ‘Having fully awakened, I will work for the welfare of beings, a welfare that comes with the sort of Dharma that frees beings from distortion.’
 “To illustrate, Śāriputra, a person conjured up by a magician conjures up many hundred thousands of billions of living beings. Having conjured them up, he satisfies them by feeding them many delectable soft and hard foods,  but even having satisfied them by feeding them, when he cries out cries of delight, saying, ‘I have greatly increased my merit,’ what do you think, Śāriputra, has anyone at all been fed and satisfied?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Similarly, Śāriputra, starting from the first production of the thought, when bodhisattva great beings practice the six perfections, practice the four concentrations, practice the four immeasurables, practice the four formless absorptions, practice the four applications of mindfulness, practice the four right efforts, practice the four legs of miraculous power, practice the five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path, practice the fourteen emptinesses, practice the signlessness meditative stabilization and wishlessness meditative stabilization, and practice the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, cleanse the awakening path, purify a buddhafield, and bring beings to maturity, they do not apprehend any being at all, who, having been apprehended, has to be tamed.” 
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ path on which bodhisattva great beings who have to purify a buddhafield and bring beings to maturity practice?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here,  starting from the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings make a practice of the perfection of giving; make a practice of the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom; up to make a practice of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha; and bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield.”
 “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving bring beings to maturity?”
 “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom give gifts to beings, and having given gifts advise and instruct them like this: ‘Sons of a good family, here do not grasp at and seize on giving gifts. Do not, by seizing on giving gifts, make a body come into being, a body that brings with it the experience of many sufferings. Sons of a good family, ultimately giving does not exist here, a benefactor does not exist, and a recipient does not exist either. Those three phenomena are empty of an intrinsic nature, so a phenomenon empty of a basic nature does not receive, and the emptiness of a basic nature is not grasped.’ In that way, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of giving, they give gifts to beings like that but without apprehending giving, without apprehending a giver, and without apprehending a recipient there. Such a perfection of giving is a perfection of not apprehending anything. Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving  connect beings with the result of stream enterer;similarly, connect this with each, up to connect them with unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening without apprehending any of those three phenomena. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving bring beings to maturity. They personally give gifts, inspire others to take up giving, speak in praise of giving, and speak in praise of others giving gifts as well, welcoming it. Having given such gifts, bodhisattva great beings take birth sharing in the good fortune of those in great sāla tree–like royal families, take birth sharing in the good fortune of those in great sāla tree–like brahmin families, take birth sharing in the good fortune of those in great sāla tree–like business families, or become a local ruler, or become a wheel-turning emperor, or, having attained sovereignty over an empire, gather humans with the four ways of gathering a retinue. What are the four? They gather them by giving, kind words, beneficial actions, and consistency between words and deeds. 
 “Having gathered those beings into a retinue by giving, they gradually establish them in morality, and establish them in meditative stabilization and wisdom, the four concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, the four applications of mindfulness, up to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and in the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization. They cause them to enter into the flawlessness that is a perfect state and inspire them to take up the state of a worthy one, a pratyekbuddha’s awakening, up to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening: ‘Hey, you people! Fully awakening to unsurpassed,  perfect, complete awakening is not hard. Other than it not being realized because of a mind made confused by error, here there is no phenomenon to which beings are attached that exists through its intrinsic nature, so you should stop all grasping at distortions and free yourself from saṃsāra, and free others from saṃsāra too. You should do something of great value for yourselves in that way, and you should connect others with something of great value too.’ 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of giving so that when they practice, they practice in such a way that right from the first production of the thought they will not in the worst case fall into a terrible form of life nor ever not do the work of a wheel-turning emperor. And why? Because the result is like the seed. When supplicants arrive in the presence of that wheel-turning emperor, the wheel-turning emperor thinks, ‘I have assumed sovereignty over an empire for nothing other than the welfare of beings,’ and says, ‘Whatever you want, consider it given. It is yours, not mine. I am not even doing it for the sake of this inner form, never mind anything else. Apart from having accepted a life in saṃsāra for the sake of all beings, I am not someone who likes saṃsāra.’
 “Thus, out of compassion they become completely filled with great compassion, and as much as they are filled with great compassion they work for the welfare of beings even though those sorts of beings who might become perfected cannot be apprehended except as names, designations, and terms in conventional usage. And you should know the conventional usage, furthermore, is a nonconventional usage, like an echo.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings have to practice the perfection of giving as a practice where  there is no material thing at all that they will not give away to other beings, where they will even, finally, give away their flesh, so what need is there to say more about external things that beings require in order to be freed from saṃsāra?”
 “Lord, what are those requirements?”
 “What, Subhūti, are those requirements? They are these, namely, the perfection of giving is a requirement, the perfection of morality is a requirement, the perfection of patience is a requirement, the perfection of perseverance is a requirement, the perfection of concentration is a requirement, the perfection of wisdom is a requirement, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are a requirement. They are requirements because, helped by those requirements, beings are freed from saṃsāra. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving give gifts to beings, they exclaim, ‘Come here, sons of a good family! I will ensure that whatever food, or drink, up to or the seven precious stones you require are not insufficient. Guard your morality. I will ensure that the food, or drink, up to or seven precious stones are not insufficient, and relieve whatever other poverty might make you turn to immorality. One way or the other, keeping to the moral code you must gradually reach the end of suffering in one or other of the three vehicles, the Śrāvaka Vehicle, or the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, or the Great Vehicle of the knowledge of all aspects.’ Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving  thus gather a retinue of beings with the perfection of morality. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving exclaim to those who are upset and have malicious thoughts, ‘Sons of a good family! You must take from me whatever food, or drink, up to or anything else you require to relieve the poverty that causes you to be upset, or bear malice, or bitterly criticize. I will ensure that you are not destitute, so you must not be upset and bear malice. I am yours and you are mine. The possessions I have are yours, so anyone who has any need please take it. I will ensure that you are not destitute of whatever food, drink, clothes, up to or anything else you require. One way or the other, you must not be governed by rage and malice.’ Bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving thus connect beings with the perfection of patience. 
 “ ‘You are getting enraged on account of something that is pointless. There is no existent thing there at all. That rage is an imagination of the unreal, so there is no real basis that is a reason for you to be obsessed, enraged, and bear malice, and having become obsessed, enraged, and malicious, to strike with sticks, hurl weapons, and kill one another—none at all. Therefore, since when you have become upset by the imagination of the unreal you fall into the hells, or into the animal world, or into the world of Yama,  or fall into other terrible forms of life where you experience feelings of unbearable, grating, scorching suffering, well then, pay attention everyone! You will not even find a human birth because of the karma you are saddled with, so meeting with the arising of a buddha does not even come up in conversation. Do not get saddled with such karma for the sake of phenomena that are without a real basis. Pay attention everyone! It is hard to encounter the arising of a buddha. Even to be born human is hard, so do not squander this perfect human birth or else you will end up in an incurable situation in a place that precludes a perfect human birth.’ Bodhisattva great beings thus personally perfect the perfection of patience, connect others to patience, speak in praise of patience, and speak in praise of others being patient as well, welcoming it. Having connected those beings to patience and established them in patience, they cause them to gradually pass into complete nirvāṇa in the three vehicles. It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving connect beings to the perfection of patience. 
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving connect beings to the perfection of perseverance? 
 “Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings see those who are lazy, they rebuke them: ‘Why are all of you being lazy?’ 
 “They say, ‘It is because we don’t have the wherewithal to get on with it.’
 “Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving say to those beings, ‘Pay attention everyone! I will ensure that you are supplied with the wherewithal for giving, the wherewithal for morality, the wherewithal for patience, as well as all those other types of things  for making a vigorous effort, so make a vigorous effort.’
 “There, those supplied with what they require by the bodhisattva great beings make a vigorous attempt at physical and mental effort; with physical and mental effort they complete all the wholesome dharmas; with those wholesome dharmas they cultivate the noble dharmas without outflows; and having cultivated those they reach the result of stream enterer; reach the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the state of a worthy one; reach a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving connect beings to the perfection of perseverance.
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving connect beings to the perfection of concentration? 
 “Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings see those who are mentally distracted, they rebuke them: ‘Why are all of you not absorbed in meditation on the perfection of concentration?’ 
 “They say, ‘It is because we don’t have the wherewithal to get on with it.’ 
 “Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving say to those beings, ‘Pay attention everyone! I will supply you with the wherewithal, the sorts of necessary conditions for you not to apply your thoughts to ‘this is inner, this is outer, and this is inner and outer.’ 
 “There, those bodhisattva great beings supply those beings with whatever sorts of conditions are necessary so that they  do not apply thought. With that, those beings, having cut off applied thought, accomplish and dwell in the first concentration; accomplish and dwell in the second, third, and fourth concentration; become absorbed in the meditation on love, compassion, joy, and equanimity; and with those concentrations and immeasurables, cultivate . . . , up to the eightfold noble path. Having cultivated them, they gradually pass into complete nirvāṇa in the three vehicles. 
 “Among them, some will not abandon the awakening path during the period up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving connect beings to the perfection of meditative stabilization.
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving look after beings with the perfection of wisdom? Subhūti, here when bodhisattva great beings see those who are intellectually confused, they give them advice and instruct them, saying, ‘Hey! Why are all of you not cultivating the perfection of wisdom?’ 
 “When they say, ‘It is because we don’t have the wherewithal to get on with it,’ they advise and instruct those beings, saying, ‘Get those requirements from me and give gifts, guard morality, be patient, make a vigorous effort, cultivate the concentrations, and, having completed those aspects, while cultivating the perfection of wisdom  investigate whether a self, or a being, or a living being, or one who lives, or a person, up to or one who knows, or one who sees, or one who does; or the desire realm or form realm, or formless realm; or the six perfections; or the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; or the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, or any apprehended dharma at all exists.’
 “Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend any phenomenon that can be apprehended and settled down on. They do not settle down on anything, so they do not see any phenomenon that is produced or stopped or is defiled or purified. They do not see that, so they do not think, ‘This is hell. This is the animal world. This is the world of Yama. This is the class of asuras. This is a god. This is a human. This one is moral. This one is immoral. This is a stream enterer. This is a once-returner. This is a non-returner. This is a worthy one. This is a pratyekabuddha. This is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ It is thus, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving connect beings to the perfection of wisdom.
 “Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving, and standing in  the perfection of morality, perfection of patience, perfection of perseverance, perfection of concentration, and perfection of wisdom look after . . . , up to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening? Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom offer beings what they require and cause beings assisted by those requirements to meditate on the applications of mindfulness; and to meditate on the four right efforts, to meditate on the four legs of miraculous power, and to meditate on the five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path. Assisted by that path, they are freed from saṃsāra in its entirety. It is thus, Subhūti, with the noble dharmas without outflows, that bodhisattva great beings look after beings.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving see beings without a protector, suffering, and without anything to eat or drink, they bring them to maturity like this: ‘Come here, sons of a good family. Take food and drink, clothes and transport, mats and seats, incense, flower garlands, creams, up to the seven precious stones and whatever other requirements from me and make them of benefit to beings. They will be for your advantage, benefit, and happiness for a long time. Do not think that they are for my advantage, not for yours. I have been supplying these for a long time for the welfare of beings, so you should think, “They belong to me personally,” and give gifts to others.  By giving, also connect them with morality, connect them with patience, connect them with perseverance, connect them with meditative stabilization, connect them with concentration, connect them with wisdom, up to connect them with the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening. And do not be satisfied with just that, also establish them in the previously mentioned noble dharmas without outflows, and establish them in the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should bring beings to maturity in such a way that those brought to maturity are freed from the three terrible forms of life, up to they are freed from saṃsāra in its entirety. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of morality should bring beings to maturity like this: ‘Come here, sons of a good family. I will supply you those requirements—food, or drink, up to or any other human requirement—to relieve you of whatever poverty might make you turn to immorality.’ Even after having thus established those beings in the perfection of morality, they benefit them so much that when they have been benefited in that way they will take the ten wholesome action ordination, and keep an untattered morality, an untarnished morality, the moral code.
Similarly, connect this with each, up to the six perfections as well.” 
This was the seventy-sixth chapter, “The Armor for Bringing Beings to Maturity,”  of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 77: Teaching the Purification of a Buddhafield
Then it occurred to venerable Subhūti to think, “What is the path of bodhisattva great beings standing on which bodhisattva great beings have to be armed with such armor?” 
 Then the Lord, understanding in his mind the thoughts occurring to Subhūti, said to Subhūti, “Subhūti, the six perfections are the path of the bodhisattva great beings; the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening are the path of the bodhisattva great beings; and the fourteen emptinesses, nine serial absorptions, eight deliverances, ten tathāgata powers, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are the path of the bodhisattva great beings. Furthermore, Subhūti, all dharmas are the path of the bodhisattva great beings. 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is there a dharma in which bodhisattva great beings do not train, without training in which they will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Subhūti, there is no dharma in which bodhisattva great beings do not train, because without training in all dharmas, bodhisattva great beings are not able to reach the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if all dharmas are empty, how will bodhisattva great beings train in all dharmas? Lord, if they say ‘there are this many,’  or ‘they are these,’ or that these dharmas are ordinary or extraordinary, or with outflows or without outflows, or compounded or uncompounded, or the dharmas of ordinary people, or worthy one dharmas, or pratyekabuddha dharmas, have they elaborated on what cannot be elaborated, or else are they not one?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! All dharmas are empty. Subhūti, were all dharmas not to be empty, bodhisattva great beings would not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. But, Subhūti, all dharmas are empty, so bodhisattva great beings do fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “Again, Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘if all dharmas are empty, how will bodhisattva great beings make distinctions between all dharmas such as “there are this many,” or “they are these,” up to or the dharmas of ordinary people, or worthy one dharmas, or pratyekabuddha dharmas?’—Subhūti, were these ordinary beings to know ‘all dharmas are empty,’ then since they would know, bodhisattva great beings would not, having trained in all dharmas, reach the knowledge of all aspects. But, Subhūti, these beings do not know ‘all dharmas are empty,’ so bodhisattva great beings, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, make a presentation of all dharmas and teach  the doctrine to beings. 
 “Subhūti, there, right from the beginning, bodhisattva great beings practicing the awakening path should reflect deeply on the fact that here, except for its being an enactment, there is no dharma at all that can be apprehended through its own intrinsic nature. And when they thus reflect deeply on the nature of those dharmas, they do not settle down on the perfections, or the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, or the result of stream enterer, or the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, or unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, or any dharma at all. And why? Because all dharmas are empty of an intrinsic nature of all dharmas, so emptiness does not settle down on emptiness. And when even emptiness cannot be apprehended, what need is there to say more about emptiness settling down on emptiness? 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus abide without settling down on all dharmas. Standing in that training they think, ‘What are these beings doing?’, and looking at what all beings are doing, think, ‘They are grasping at nonexistence.’ It then occurs to the bodhisattva great beings to think, ‘Oh! I will free these beings well from grasping at the unreal.’ So, standing with skillful means in the perfection of wisdom, they give them advice: ‘Come here, all of you! Give gifts, and through that you will get richer and richer. But do not project a sense of false superiority because of those riches. They are totally worthless.’ Similarly, they advise them to guard morality but not project a sense of false superiority because of that morality: ‘It too is totally worthless.’ Similarly patience, similarly perseverance, similarly concentration, and similarly̛, they advise them to cultivate wisdom but not project a sense of false superiority because of that wisdom: ‘It is totally worthless.’ Similarly, they advise them to meditate on the result of stream enterer, similarly the result of once-returner, similarly the result of non-returner, similarly the state of a worthy one, similarly a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and similarly, up to all buddhadharmas: ‘But do not project a sense of false superiority because of those dharmas. They too are totally worthless.’
 “Thus, while giving advice and instruction and practicing the awakening path, they still do not settle down on any dharma at all. And why? Because, based on having emptiness as their nature, all dharmas are not things that have been settled down on, because they have no intrinsic nature such that they could have been settled down on. Thus, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practice the awakening path but are not located anywhere. By way of not being located, they practice the perfection of giving but they are not located there. They practice the perfection of morality but are not located there. They practice the perfection of patience but are not located there. They practice the perfection of perseverance but are not located there. They practice the perfection of concentration but are not located there. They practice the perfection of wisdom but are not located there. 
 “They become absorbed in the first concentration but are not located there. And why? Because the first concentration is empty of an intrinsic nature of a concentration. That which becomes absorbed, that too is empty, and those aspects on account of which they become absorbed, they are empty as well. Similarly,  they reach the second concentration, third concentration, up to the fourth concentration; similarly, love, compassion, joy, and equanimity, up to the formless absorptions; similarly, they reach the eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, and the result of stream enterer but are not located there. They reach the result of once-returner but are not located there; they reach the result of non-returner but are not located there; they reach the state of a worthy one but are not located there; and they reach a pratyekabuddha’s awakening but are not located there.”
 “Lord, why are they not located?”
 “Subhūti, they are not located for two reasons. And what are the two? It is because those results where they might be located have no intrinsic nature, nor does that on account of which they might be located, nor those who might be located. And second, because up until they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening they are not easily satisfied. They think, ‘It is not that I should not reach the result of stream enterer, but even after having reached the result of stream enterer I should not stand there; up to it is not that I should not reach a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, but even after having reached a pratyekabuddha’s awakening I should not stand there. And why? Because from my production of the first thought I have never produced any other thought except that of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’ And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings, from the first production of the thought, have never produced any other thought except that of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And similarly, starting from when they entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva up until they reached the tenth level, their thought  never wavered and they never produced any other thought except of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 “Subhūti, no matter how much physical, verbal, and mental training those bodhisattva great beings put into effect, it is not other than the thought of awakening. The bodhisattva great beings keep on thinking of awakening without wavering in their mind, producing a path to awakening.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if all dharmas are unproduced, well then, Lord, how will bodhisattva great beings produce a path to awakening?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! All dharmas have not been produced. How so? All dharmas have not been produced for those who do not occasion anything.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, does the true dharmic nature of dharmas not remain?”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, the true dharmic nature of dharmas remains, but still, for the sake of those who do not know that establishment of dharmas, bodhisattva great beings produce a path to awakening and with that path free beings from saṃsāra.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord,  “Lord, do they reach awakening on that path that has been produced?”
 “No,”
 “Lord, do they reach awakening on that path that has not been produced?”
 “No.”
 “Lord, do they reach awakening on that path that has not been produced when it is not produced and is produced when it is produced?
 “No.”
 “Lord, do they reach awakening on that path that has neither been produced nor not produced?”
 “No.”
 “Well then, Lord, how do they reach awakening?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, awakening is not reached by the path and it is not reached by what is not the path. Just awakening is the path, and just the path is awakening.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if just awakening is the path, and just the path is awakening, well then, would not bodhisattva great beings already have reached awakening? Why is it still taught, then, that ‘a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha is on account of the thirty-two major marks of a great person, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha’?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord asked him in return, “Subhūti, what do you think,  does a buddha reach awakening?”
 “No, Lord. Just a buddha is awakening, and just awakening is a buddha.”
 “Again, Subhūti, in regard to what you have said—‘Do bodhisattva great beings reach awakening or does it not happen at all?’—Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings, having completed the six perfections, completed the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and completed the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening through the wisdom of the unique single instant that is the vajropama meditative stabilization. Having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, from then on they are called tathāgata. They know all dharmas and see all dharmas, therefore they are said to be all-knowing.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if all dharmas are isolated from their own intrinsic nature, well then, Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings purify a buddhafield?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here, starting from the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings purify their own and others’ final physical basis of suffering, final verbal basis of suffering, and final mental basis of suffering  and, with those purified, purify a buddhafield.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ final physical basis of suffering, final verbal basis of suffering, and final mental basis of suffering?”
 The Lord replied to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, the unwholesome physical action of killing, stealing, and illicit sex because of lust; the unwholesome verbal action of lying, backbiting, insulting, and babbling nonsense; and the unwholesome mental action of coveting, malice, and wrong view are called the bodhisattva great beings’ final physical basis of suffering, final verbal basis of suffering, and final mental basis of suffering. Bodhisattva great beings purify those final physical, verbal, and mental bases of suffering of themselves and others, and with those purified, purify a buddhafield.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, stingy thought is the bodhisattva great beings’ final mental basis of suffering; immoral thought, angry thought, lazy thought, distracted thought, and intellectually confused thought are the bodhisattva great beings’ final mental basis of suffering too. Furthermore, Subhūti, morality that has not been purified is also the bodhisattva great beings’ final mental basis of suffering. Furthermore, Subhūti, separation from the four applications of mindfulness is also the bodhisattva great beings’  final mental basis of suffering; similarly, separation from the four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path, and from the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization is also the bodhisattva great beings’ final mental basis of suffering. Furthermore, Subhūti, while making manifest the result of stream enterer, feeling delight in it is also the bodhisattva great beings’ final mental basis of suffering; up to while making manifest the state of a worthy one, and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, feeling delight in it is also the bodhisattva great beings’ final mental basis of suffering. Furthermore, Subhūti, the perception of form is the basis of suffering, and the perception of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness is the basis of suffering; the perception of eyes is the basis of suffering, and the perception of ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind is the basis of suffering; and the perception of female is the basis of suffering and the perception of male is the basis of suffering. The perception of desire realm, perception of form realm, perception of formless realm, perception of wholesome, perception of unwholesome, perception of compounded, and perception of uncompounded, Subhūti, is also the bodhisattva great beings’ final physical basis of suffering, final verbal basis of suffering, and final mental basis of suffering. 
 “Having eliminated all those bases of suffering, they personally give gifts and they inspire others  to give as well. They give food to those who want food, give drinks to those who want drink, up to give whatever they require, as appropriate, to those who have requirements, establish others in just those and inspire them to take them up, making that wholesome root into something shared in common by all beings and dedicating it to the purification of a buddhafield. 
Similarly, connect this with each, up to morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom. 
 “Having filled up this great billionfold world system with the seven precious stones, they personally give it as a gift because of the Three Jewels, inspire other to take up just that too, and dedicate it thus: ‘Through this wholesome root, may my buddhafield be made of the seven precious stones.’
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings cause divine instrumental music to be played for the buddhas or buddha reliquaries and dedicate it thus: ‘Through this wholesome root, may divine instrumental music pleasing to the mind be constantly and always played in my buddhafield.’ 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having filled up this great billionfold world system with a divine fragrance, offer it to the buddhas or buddha reliquaries and dedicate it thus: ‘Through this wholesome root, may a divine fragrance come forth in my buddhafield.’ 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having offered food with a hundred flavors to the tathāgatas and the tathāgatas’ śrāvakas, dedicate it thus:  ‘Through this wholesome root, may the śrāvakas in my buddhafield when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening partake of food with a hundred flavors.’
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having put divine creams on the tathāgatas, the tathāgatas’ śrāvakas, tathāgata statues, and tathāgata reliquaries, dedicate it thus: ‘Through this wholesome root, may the beings in my buddhafield when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening experience perfect feelings of divine touch.’
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, it occurs to bodhisattva great beings to think, ‘Just by thinking about it may I give the five sorts of sense objects—forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and feelings—pleasing to the mind to the buddhas, the buddhas’ śrāvakas, and all beings.’ Having thought that and given them, they dedicate it thus: ‘Through this wholesome root, may all the śrāvaka saṅghas and all beings in my buddhafield when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening come to have the five sorts of sense objects—forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and feelings—pleasing to the mind just by thinking about it.’
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, personally in association with all beings, give the gift of the five sorts of sense objects—forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and feelings—pleasing to the mind to the buddhas and the buddhas’ śrāvakas. 
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, it occurs to bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom to think, ‘I will become absorbed in the first concentration and cause others to enter the first concentration as well. Similarly, up to I will cause others to enter the fourth concentration and establish them there. I will establish them in love, compassion, joy, equanimity, up to the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening.’ And they think, ‘Through this wholesome root, may the beings in my buddhafield when I have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening not be separated from the two gifts; may they not be separated from the four concentrations; may they not be separated from the four immeasurables; and may they not be separated from the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening.’ In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings purify a buddhafield, and until all those aspirations are fulfilled do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. They cause themselves to be endowed with all those wholesome dharmas and others to be endowed with them as well. They personally have beautiful bodies and those beings that bodhisattva great beings bring to maturity have beautiful bodies as well. They, because of this—namely being assisted by merit—accomplish beautiful, good-looking, and handsome bodies.
 “Thus, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings purify a buddhafield so that there will not even be the designation of the three terrible forms of life;  there will not even be the designation of different views; there will not even be the designation of greed, hatred, and confusion; there will not even be the words male or female; there will not even be words for the two vehicles; there will not even be the designation of impermanence, suffering, or self; there will not even be the designation of appropriation; there will not even be the designation of self-grasping and taking something as ‘mine’; there will not even be the designation of attachment or obsession; there will not even be the designation of distortion; and there will not even be the designation of a presentation of the results. Quite the opposite, a proclamation of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilization will issue forth; a proclamation that those beings thus want to give away outer and inner things will issue forth; from trees stirred by the wind and from the outer and inner dharmas, words for emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness will issue forth; words for nonproduction and noncessation will issue forth; such a proclamation of the actual intrinsic nature of those dharmas will issue forth; such a proclamation that ‘all dharmas are empty of all dharmas,’ of the actual nature of those dharmas will issue forth; and a teaching of the Dharma will issue forth, proclaiming, ‘Whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, all dharmas are empty of all dharmas, in that which is empty there is no causal sign, and in that which has no causal sign there is nothing wished for.’ Such a proclamation of Dharma as appropriate for those standing up or sitting down, lying down or walking, will come forth in the day or at night.  It is thus that they purify a buddhafield. 
 “All the lord buddhas, as many as there are in all world systems in the ten directions, raise their voices in praise of that tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha who has fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening in that buddhafield. All those beings who hear the praise and name of that tathāgata become destined for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. None of the beings become uncertain about whether the Dharma taught by that tathāgata, worthy one, perfect complete buddha is the Dharma or is not the Dharma. And why? Because in the true dharmic nature of all dharmas, there is nothing that is not the Dharma at all. All that is the Dharma. There, those beings overcome by unwholesome roots who have not planted wholesome roots in relation to the buddhas and the buddhas’ śrāvakas, who are influenced by bad friends, who are obstinate about the view of self, up to who are obstinate about every instance of a view, who are standing at the extreme of going on and on forever and at the extreme of annihilation, who, seized by an incorrect grasping, imagine someone not a buddha to be a perfectly complete buddha and imagine a perfectly complete buddha to be someone who is not a buddha, and say about the doctrine that it is not the doctrine. Saying about the doctrine that it is not the doctrine, they reject the doctrine; having rejected the doctrine their bodies disintegrate and after death they go into a terrible form of life, fall into error, and are born in hell. Those lord buddhas, having fully awakened  to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, liberate those beings included in saṃsāra from those terrible forms of life and from being riddled with views. Having liberated them, they establish them in the class of those destined for the perfect state and, having established them there, they will not, from then on, be born in hell.
 “Subhūti, that is how bodhisattva great beings purify a buddhafield, and those beings who have been purified do not abide in any ordinary dharmas or extraordinary dharmas, dharmas with outflows or dharmas without outflows, compounded dharmas or uncompounded dharmas at all. And up until their unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they all remain destined for the perfect state.”
This was the seventy-seventh chapter, “Teaching the Purification of a Buddhafield,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 78: Teaching the Skillful Means for the Purification of a Buddhafield
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, are bodhisattva great beings ‘destined’ or rather ‘not necessarily destined’?” 
 “Subhūti,” replied the Lord, “bodhisattva great beings are destined, not not necessarily destined.”
 “Lord, which group, the śrāvaka group or the pratyekabuddha group, are they destined to be in?”
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings are not necessarily destined to be in the śrāvaka group or in the pratyekabuddha group; they are destined to be in the buddha group.”
 “Lord, are bodhisattva great beings  who have produced the first thought destined [to be in the buddha group], or are those who are irreversible from awakening destined, or are those who are in a last existence destined?”
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have produced the first thought are destined; those who are irreversible are also destined; and those who are in a last existence are destined as well.”
 “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings who have become destined take birth in terrible forms of life?”
 “No, Subhūti. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have become destined do not take birth in terrible forms of life. What do you think, Subhūti, does the Aṣṭamaka, or stream enterer, or once-returner, or non-returner, or worthy one, or pratyekabuddha take birth in terrible forms of life?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who have become destined also do not take birth in terrible forms of life. Subhūti, it is impossible that bodhisattva great beings who, starting from the first production of the thought, give gifts, guard morality, make a practice of being patient, make a vigorous effort, become absorbed in meditative stabilization, cultivate wisdom, cultivate love, compassion, joy, and equanimity toward all beings, and remain in order to eliminate all unwholesome dharmas would take birth in terrible forms of life. It is impossible that they would take birth among the long-lived gods. It is impossible that they would take birth in areas where the wholesome dharmas are practiced incorrectly or with a sheep-like obtuseness. It is impossible that they would take birth in areas where there are robbers and barbarians, at the outer limits of society. It is impossible that they would take birth in families with wrong views.  It is impossible that they would take birth where there is no word Buddha, no word Dharma, and no word Saṅgha. It is impossible that they would take birth where they follow the view that action has no consequences. It is also impossible, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings, having set out from the first production of the thought for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening with a surpassing aspiration, would ply the ten unwholesome actions.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if bodhisattva great beings with such wholesome roots do not take birth in those places—namely, the negative ones—then where were those wholesome roots when the Tathāgata took birth in the animal world, as you personally have taught in your birth stories?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, the Bodhisattva Great Being did not take birth as an animal because of unwholesome karma, rather he intentionally, with skillful means, appropriated whatever sort of body would be of benefit to beings for the sake of beings.
 “Subhūti, do worthy ones and pratyekabuddhas have the skillful means of the bodhisattva great beings who are endowed with such skillful means that, when they have taken birth in the animal world, they inspire those very beings who are leading them to slaughter to take up great patience, calming them and establishing them in it, giving up their body for the sake of those beings and not hurting those beings? 
 “Subhūti, also because of this one of many explanations you should know that bodhisattva great beings  thus complete great compassion for the welfare of beings and for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and take birth in the animal world, but still are not sullied by the defects of the forms of life in the animal world.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, in which wholesome dharmas do bodhisattva great beings stand when they appropriate such a body?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, is there some sort of wholesome dharma that bodhisattva great beings do not have to complete? The completion of all wholesome dharmas is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, so starting from the first production of the thought up until seated at the site of awakening, there is no wholesome dharma at all that bodhisattva great beings do not have to complete. They will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening unless they complete all those wholesome dharmas. It is impossible. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should train in the completion of all wholesome dharmas from the first production of the thought onward. When they have trained in them, they reach the knowledge of all aspects, and all connections with residual impressions are eliminated.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, how, through a noble action without outflows, do bodhisattva great beings endowed with bright dharmas take birth in terrible forms of life or in the animal world?”
 “Subhūti, are tathāgatas  noble beings without outflows?”
 “So they are, Lord. So they are, Sugata. Tathāgatas are noble beings without outflows.”
 “Subhūti, tathāgatas magically produce a living being included in the animal world, and having magically produced it there they have it do the work of a buddha, do they not?”
 “Yes they do, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, does the Tathāgata turn into an animal?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, does the Tathāgata experience the sufferings of the animal world?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings are endowed with noble bright dharmas without outflows but still appropriate such a body at will, as appropriate and according to circumstances, and with that body brings beings to maturity. 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, when a worthy one has magically created a magical creation, does that magical creation do the work of the worthy one and on account of that work produce joy in others?” 
 “It is so, Lord.”
 “Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings are endowed with the noble bright dharmas without outflows but still appropriate such a body and work for the welfare of beings. They do not, however, suffer on account of such a body and do not experience feelings of suffering. 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, when a magician makes an elephant’s body, or a horse’s body, or a bull’s body, conjured up by magic, appear, or when they make the bodies of various other types of living beings  appear, do those turn into an elephant, or turn into a horse, or turn into a bull, or turn into those bodies of various other types of living beings?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings endowed with the noble bright dharmas without outflows make such bodies appear at will. But even though they work for the welfare of beings, they still do not suffer on account of such a body and do not experience such types of feelings of suffering.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti said to the Lord, “Lord, bodhisattva great beings endowed with such noble knowledge without outflows, who appropriate whatever sort of a body is capable of working for the welfare of beings, are those with great skill in means. Lord, standing in those bright dharmas, do bodhisattva great beings utilize such skillful means but still are not affected by those actions?”
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom are endowed with such skillful means as those. Endowed with those skillful means, they work for the welfare of beings in world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the east, south, west, north, and the intermediate directions, but they have no contact with them at all. And why? Because those bodhisattva great beings do not apprehend any dharma at all that could be contacted, that makes contact, or where contact could be made. And why? Because all three of those dharmas are empty of an intrinsic nature.  Hence emptiness does not contact emptiness and emptiness does not contact any dharma at all, and emptiness is also not something that can be contacted. That, Subhūti, is the emptiness of not apprehending. Standing there, the bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 “Lord, do bodhisattva great beings stand only in the perfection of wisdom but not in other dharmas?”
 “Subhūti, is there any dharma not included in the perfection of wisdom?”
 “Lord, if the perfection of wisdom is empty of an intrinsic nature, how could all dharmas be included in the perfection of wisdom? Lord, there is no dharma at all that is included and that is not included in emptiness.”
 “Subhūti, all dharmas are empty of all dharmas, so all dharmas are not not included in emptiness.”
 “Lord, all dharmas are empty of all dharmas.”
 “Subhūti, if all dharmas are empty of all dharmas, all dharmas are included in emptiness, are they not?”
 “So it is, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, you should understand from this one of many explanations that bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom like that utilize such skillful means as those.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, standing in the emptiness of all dharmas, find and produce within themselves the perfection of clairvoyance that grows from wholesome roots  planted in relation to those lord buddhas, a clairvoyance that they stand in when they travel to world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction, attend on the lord buddhas dwelling and maintaining themselves in those world systems, and listen to them teaching the doctrine?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom see all those world systems, as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction, as empty of an intrinsic nature, and those lord buddhas who are standing there as empty of an intrinsic nature too, as nothing but descriptions based on name and conventional term designations, and see all those designations as empty of an intrinsic nature as well. If those world systems were not empty of an intrinsic nature, and those lord buddhas were not empty of an intrinsic nature, and those practices that are designations were also not empty of an intrinsic nature, there would then just be a partial emptiness. But such a partial emptiness is not apprehended, so all dharmas are empty of all dharmas, and therefore bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means find and produce within themselves the perfection of clairvoyance, and standing in that clairvoyance find and produce within themselves the divine eye, divine hearing, performance of miraculous power, knowledge of others’ thoughts, recollection of past lives, and knowledge of deaths and births. 
 “Without the clairvoyances bodhisattva great beings cannot fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening; therefore, the bodhisattva great beings’  awakening is included within this perfection of clairvoyance, and awakening has to be pursued through these clairvoyances. While in pursuit they see all wholesome dharmas with their divine eye, connect others to all wholesome dharmas, but do not settle down on those wholesome dharmas. And why? Because all those wholesome dharmas are empty of an intrinsic nature, and emptiness does not settle down on anything. In emptiness there is no experience to be relished, so there is nothing to be settled down on and nothing to be experienced. Therefore bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom find and produce the divine eye within themselves, and with the divine eye those bodhisattva great beings standing in the true nature of dharmas produce bodies of the kind that teach the doctrine to beings, but still do not apprehend beings or the designation of beings. 
 “It is thus, by way of not apprehending anything, that bodhisattva great beings find and produce within themselves the perfection of clairvoyance. With those clairvoyances they make the dharmas that need to be made with clairvoyance. With the purified divine eye that transcends the human, those bodhisattva great beings see world systems in the east, south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions, and below and above. With the performance of miraculous power they go there, and by giving, or being moral, or being patient, or persevering, or concentration, or wisdom, or by the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, or the concentrations, or deliverances, or meditative stabilizations, or absorptions, or śrāvaka dharmas, or pratyekabuddha dharmas, or bodhisattva dharmas, or buddha dharmas, work for the welfare of beings  doing what needs to be done for those beings. 
 “There they give a Dharma discourse to beings who are stingy, teaching the Dharma like this: ‘Give gifts. Poverty is suffering. If, because of poverty, you cannot work for your own welfare, what need is there to say more about the welfare of another? So, you should give gifts, be happy yourself, and make others happy too. Do not feed on each other’s flesh or else you will not find freedom from the three terrible forms of life.’ 
 “They give a Dharma discourse on morality to beings who are immoral, teaching the Dharma like this: ‘Hey, all of you! Immorality is suffering. If, because of immorality, you cannot work for your own welfare, what need is there to say more about the welfare of another? The maturation of immorality is in hell, the animal world, and the world of Yama; if you fall into the three terrible forms of life you cannot even extricate yourself, never mind others. So do not provide any opportunity at all for even a single immoral thought or else later on you will come to regret it.’ 
 “They give a Dharma discourse on patience to beings who are upsetting each other and thinking malicious thoughts, teaching the Dharma like this: ‘Hey, all of you! Do not upset one another. You do not get any wholesome dharma at all from upsetting someone. So, when you upset and bear malice toward each other, it is grounds for falling into hell, the animal world, and the world of Yama. Therefore, if you should not entertain any angry and disturbing thought or malicious thought at all, what need is there to say more about providing an opportunity for any other unwholesome thought?’
Similarly, connect this with they connect beings who are lazy to perseverance; connect beings who are distracted to meditative stabilization;  connect beings with intellectual confusion to wisdom; connect beings with a strong libido to meditation on the disagreeable; and cause those who have set out on a wrong path to enter the path, connecting them with the śrāvaka path, or the pratyekabuddha path, or the buddha path, teaching the Dharma like this: ‘All those dharmas you settle down on are empty of an intrinsic nature. You cannot settle down on dharmas that are empty of an intrinsic nature; emptiness does not settle down.’ 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom thus stand in the clairvoyances and work for the welfare of beings. Subhūti, without standing in the clairvoyances, bodhisattva great beings cannot teach the doctrine to beings or cause those who have set out on a wrong path to enter the path—it is impossible. 
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, a bird without wings cannot fly in the sky. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings cannot teach the doctrine to beings without resorting to the clairvoyances, so bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should therefore find and produce within themself the clairvoyances. With those clairvoyances that they have found and produced within themselves, they easily do what they want to do for the welfare of beings. 
 “With their divine eye they see those world systems, as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. They see those living beings who have taken birth there, and having seen them, having gone there with magical powers, they know just by turning their minds to it the thoughts of other beings. Having come to know them, they again teach the doctrine with a discourse on giving, or with a discourse on morality, or with a discourse on the noble truths, up to or with a discourse  on complete nirvāṇa. 
 “With their divine ear they hear human and nonhuman sounds. They hear all those lord buddhas giving Dharma discourses in world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction, and having heard them they take those up for suchness. Having taken them up for suchness, they again teach the doctrine to beings with a discourse on giving, up to or with a discourse on complete nirvāṇa. 
 “They are endowed with an extremely pure knowledge of the ways of thinking. With that knowledge of the ways of thinking they come to know the thoughts of beings, again teaching them the doctrine like that with a discourse on giving, or with those discourses . . . , up to on complete nirvāṇa. 
 “They recollect their own and others’ various previous states of existence. With that knowledge recollecting previous states of existence they are thus aware, ‘This is the name of the previous tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha,’ and, ‘There were this many in his retinue of śrāvakas.’ They again teach the doctrine to those beings who admire their recollection of previous states of existence with a discourse on giving, up to or with a discourse on complete nirvāṇa. 
 “With their magical powers they go to many world systems, attend on the lord buddhas, and plant wholesome roots in relation to those lord buddhas. Having planted those wholesome roots, they again return from those same world systems. Endowed with an extremely pure knowledge of the extinction of outflows, they teach the doctrine to those beings with a discourse on giving, up to or with a discourse on complete nirvāṇa. 
 “In that way, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should find and produce within themselves the clairvoyances. With those  clairvoyances completely mastered they will appropriate whatever body they want to appropriate, but still they will not get happiness or suffering, or mental happiness or mental anguish; they will not have attachment or rage.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, a man magically created by a tathāgata does all the work that has to be done but still is not affected by happiness or suffering. Similarly, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of wisdom, sporting in the clairvoyances in world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, give Dharma discourses exactly according to beliefs but still are not affected by happiness or suffering. 
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should sport in and meditate on the clairvoyances in such a way that while sporting in the clairvoyances it will purify a buddhafield and bring beings to maturity. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings cannot fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening unless they have purified a buddhafield and brought beings to maturity. And why? Subhūti, it is because unless the branches of the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening have been completed, there is no unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
 The Lord having said this, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, what are the branches of the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening, having completed which the bodhisattva great beings will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him,  “Subhūti, all wholesome dharmas are the branches of the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening.”
 “Lord,” he asked, “what are those wholesome dharmas by means of which the bodhisattva great beings will full awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, starting from the first production of the thought, that nonconceptualization even when practicing the perfection of giving is a wholesome dharma. And how, when giving, is there nonconceptualization? Based on the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, there is no conceptualization of giving as ‘this is giving’; there is no conceptualization of ‘it has to be given to that one,’ or ‘I have to give’—none of those three. With that perfection of giving they free themselves from saṃsāra and free others as well. Subhūti, those wholesome dharmas are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Subhūti, past, future, and present bodhisattva great beings have gone beyond, will go beyond, and are going beyond on that path. 
 “Similarly, bodhisattva great beings have to complete the perfections of morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, and wisdom; the four concentrations, four immeasurables, and four formless absorptions; the four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; the three gateways to liberation, fourteen emptinesses, eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, dhāraṇī gateways, and meditative stabilization gateways; and the detailed and thorough knowledges, up to eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—as many wholesome dharmas as there are—the entire bodhisattva’s path. Having completed those wholesome dharmas, bodhisattva great beings will reach the knowledge of all aspects, and having reached that, will turn the wheel of the Dharma.” 
This was the seventy-eighth chapter, “Teaching the Skillful Means for the Purification of a Buddhafield,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 79: Teaching the Nonexistence of an Intrinsic Nature
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if those dharmas are the bodhisattva dharmas, well then, Lord, what are the buddhadharmas?”
 The Lord replied, “Again, Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘If those dharmas are the bodhisattva dharmas what, then, are the buddhadharmas?’—Subhūti, just those bodhisattva dharmas are the buddhadharmas as well. When bodhisattva great beings have completely awakened to those dharmas in all aspects and have reached the knowledge of all aspects, they eliminate all the residual impression connections. They will fully awaken to those, but tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have fully awakened to all dharmas through the wisdom of the unique single instant. That, Subhūti, is the difference between bodhisattva great beings and the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.
 “To illustrate, Subhūti, even though a candidate is one thing and a result-recipient another, still both are not not the highest person. Similarly, Subhūti,  bodhisattva great beings stand on the unobstructed path, but tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have reached a knowledge of all dharmas without obscurations. That, Subhūti, is the difference between bodhisattva great beings and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti inquired further of him, “Lord, if all dharmas are empty of their own marks, how can you apprehend specific features in all dharmas that are empty of their own marks and make the distinctions, ‘This is a being in hell, this is one in the animal world, this is one in the world of Yama, this is a god, this is a human, this one is on the Gotra level, this one is an Aṣṭamaka, this is a stream enterer, this is a once-returner, this is a non-returner, this is a worthy one, this is a pratyekabuddha, this is a bodhisattva, and this is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfect complete buddha’? Lord, just as those persons cannot be apprehended, so too karma cannot be apprehended, and just as karma cannot be apprehended, so too the maturation cannot be apprehended either.”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! Karma and the maturation of karma cannot be apprehended in all dharmas that are empty of their own marks. Those who do not understand that all dharmas are empty of their own marks behave badly or behave well, or accumulate karma with outflows or without outflows. Through the karma from behaving badly they fall into the three  terrible forms of life; through the karma from behaving well they are born among gods and humans; through wholesome karma without flaws they are born in the form realm and the formless realm. There the bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of giving, up to practice the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, producing those bodhisattva dharmas in a practice without flaws. Having produced them, they become absorbed in the vajropama meditative stabilization endowed with the surrounding limbs of awakening, and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they work for the welfare of beings. Because they have worked for their welfare they are not lost, and because they are not lost, they do not from then on take birth in the five forms of life in saṃsāra.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, does the Lord, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, apprehend the five forms of life in saṃsāra?”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, does a tathāgata apprehend bright, or dark, or bright and dark, or neither bright nor dark dharmas?”
 “No, Subhūti.”
 “Lord, if they have not apprehended them, how have they designated hell, the animal world, and the world of Yama; how have they designated gods and humans; how have they designated stream enterer; how have they designated once-returner, non-returner, worthy one, and pratyekabuddha; how have they designated bodhisattva; and how have they designated tathāgata, worthy one, perfect complete buddha?” 
 “Subhūti, do these beings know that phenomena are empty of their own marks?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, if these beings were thus to know ‘phenomena are empty of their own marks,’ bodhisattva great beings would not set out to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and would not, when they have entered into unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, free beings from the three terrible forms of life, up to the five forms of life in saṃsāra. But, Subhūti, these beings do not thus know that phenomena are empty of their own marks, and because they do not know, they are not freed from the three terrible forms of life, and the five forms of life in saṃsāra. Therefore, bodhisattva great beings, having heard from those lord buddhas that ‘phenomena are empty of their own marks,’ set out to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the sake of beings. 
 “These phenomena do not exist in the way that foolish ordinary people have settled down on them. These beings, having themselves constructed unreal phenomena and apprehended them, have the perception of a being where there is no being, the perception of form where there is no form, the perception of feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness where there is no consciousness, up to the perception of compounded and uncompounded dharmas where there are no compounded and uncompounded dharmas. With their minds distorted because of the error of constructing the unreal, they accumulate physical, verbal, and mental karma and are not freed from the five forms of life in saṃsāra. Therefore, bodhisattva great beings, having included all wholesome dharmas in the practice  of the perfection of wisdom, pursue the bodhisattva practice, and pursuing that fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they free beings from the five forms of life in saṃsāra.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if all phenomena are empty of their own marks, well then, how do bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and free beings from the five forms of life in saṃsāra?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, expound, explain, set forth, and establish the four noble truths—suffering, the origination of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path leading to the cessation of suffering. Included in these four noble truths are all the wholesome dharmas on the side of awakening, as many as there are, and through those dharmas on the side of awakening there is a presentation of the Three Jewels (which three?—these, namely, the Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel, and Saṅgha Jewel), and when the Three Jewels have appeared, beings are freed from the five forms of life in saṃsāra.” 
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, will beings pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing suffering or will they pass into complete nirvāṇa  on account of suffering? Will they come to be in complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing the origination of suffering or will they come to be in complete nirvāṇa on account of the origination of suffering? Will they come to be in complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing the cessation of suffering or will they come to be in complete nirvāṇa on account of the cessation of suffering? Will they come to be in complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing the path leading to the cessation of suffering or will they come to be in complete nirvāṇa on account of the path leading to the cessation of suffering?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, they will not pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing suffering, nor on account of suffering; not on account of knowing the origination of suffering, nor on account of the origination of suffering; not on account of knowing the cessation of suffering, nor on account of the cessation of suffering; and they will not pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing the path leading to the cessation of suffering nor on account of the path leading to the cessation of suffering. Subhūti, I have said that they will pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of the sameness of the noble truths—they will not pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing suffering, nor on account of suffering; not on account of knowing the origination of suffering, nor on account of the origination of suffering; not on account of knowing the cessation of suffering, nor on account of the cessation of suffering; and not on account of knowing the path leading to the cessation of suffering nor on account of the path leading to the cessation of suffering.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, what is the sameness of the four noble truths?” 
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “it is where there is no knowledge of suffering and no suffering; where there is no knowledge of the origination of suffering and no origination of suffering; where there is no knowledge of the cessation of suffering and no cessation of suffering; and where there is no knowledge of the path leading to the cessation of suffering and no path leading to the cessation of suffering.
 “Furthermore, Subhūti, whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, the suchness of the four noble truths, their unmistaken suchness and unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, and the establishment of dharmas remain as just the dharma-constituent. Such a dharma-constituent is a natural state not robbed of mindfulness, the true nature of dharmas that is never ruined. Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom practice the truths in order to awaken, one way or the other, to the truths.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom practice in order to awaken to the truths? How, while practicing, do they awaken to the truths? How, having awakened, do they practice for suchness? And how, having practiced, do they not fall to the śrāvaka level, not fall to the pratyekabuddha level, but rather enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, there is no dharma the limit of which bodhisattva great beings do not see. When they do not see any dharma, they then do not apprehend it. Not apprehending anything they see that all dharmas are empty; they see that all those dharmas included in the truths  or not included in the truths are empty. Seeing like that, they enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva and stand at the Gotra level. Those bodhisattvas standing at the Gotra level do not fall onto a peak—a peak that, when fallen on, would be a fall to the śrāvaka level or the pratyekabuddha level.
 “Standing at the Gotra level, those bodhisattva great beings generate the four concentrations, and generate the four immeasurables and the four formless absorptions. Standing at that calm abiding level they make a detailed examination of all dharmas and also realize the four noble truths. Even though they comprehend suffering, they do not produce any thought with suffering as its objective support; they abandon the origination of suffering, but they do not produce any thought with origination as its objective support; they actualize the cessation of suffering, but they do not produce any thought with cessation as its objective support; they cultivate the path to the cessation of suffering, but they do not produce any thought with the path as its objective support. On the contrary, with a thought inclined to awakening, they see all dharmas for what they really are.”
 “Lord, what are ‘all dharmas as they really are’?”
 “Subhūti, it is seeing all dharmas as emptiness.”
 “Lord, how do they see all dharmas as empty?”
 “Subhūti, they see like this—that all dharmas are empty of their own marks. But even though they see with such an insight that ‘all dharmas are empty,’ they still do not see an intrinsic nature on which they might stand and fully awaken to awakening; they see no such intrinsic nature at all.”
 “In that case, Lord, is awakening a nonexistent thing?”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly  as you say! Awakening is a nonexistent thing. It has not been made by buddhas, it has not been made by pratyekabuddhas, it has not been made by worthy ones, and it has not been made by those bodhisattva great beings who are practicing for it. On the contrary, it is because beings do not know and do not see things as they really are that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means teach the doctrine to beings.”
This was the seventy-ninth chapter, “Teaching the Nonexistence of an Intrinsic Nature,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 80: Teaching That There is No Defilement or Purification
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, if all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, if they have not been made by buddhas, have not been made by pratyekabuddhas, have not been made by worthy ones, have not been made by non-returners, have not been made by once-returners, have not been made by stream enterers, and have not been made by those bodhisattva great beings who are practicing for this awakening, well then, Lord, why in these dharmas is there a distinction made between them, or a presentation of them thus: ‘These are beings in hell, these in the animal world, these in the world of Yama, these are gods, these are humans; because of this karma they are in hell, because of this in the animal world, because of this in the world of Yama, because of this they are gods, because of this humans, because of this Brahmakāyika, up to Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana gods; because of this karma they are stream enterers, up to because of this karma they are pratyekabuddhas, because of this karma they are bodhisattvas, and because of this karma they are tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas’?  Lord, in a dharma that is not real there is no action such that, on account of such an action, they would go to hell, or to the animal world, or to the world of Yama, or take birth as a god or human, up to a Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana god; or reach the result of stream enterer, or reach the result of once-returner, or the result of non-returner, or the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; or be a bodhisattva, or practice the awakening path, or reach the knowledge of all aspects, or, having reached that, cause beings to be liberated from saṃsāra.”
 Venerable Subhūti having inquired about that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! Subhūti, whereas in a dharma that is not real there is no karma, there is no action, and there is no result, unlettered, foolish, ordinary people uneducated about the noble dharmas do not know that dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, and because of thought that has arisen on account of error, accumulate a variety of karma. Certain sorts of bodies come into being because of that: the bodies of beings in hell, or in the animal world, or in the world of Yama, or of gods, or of humans, up to of the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana gods come into being. In a dharma that is not real there is no action, there is nothing being done, and there is no result—that which is not real is just not real. 
 “Again, Subhūti, in regard to what you have said—in a dharma that is not real  there is no action such that, on account of such an action, they would reach . . . , up to the result of stream enterer, or reach . . . , up to the state of a worthy one, or a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; or be a bodhisattva great being practicing the knowledge of path aspects, or reach the knowledge of all aspects of a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha, or, having reached that, cause beings to be liberated from saṃsāra—Subhūti, what do you think, is the path not a nonexistent thing, or is the result of stream enterer not a nonexistent thing, or is the result of once-returner not a nonexistent thing, or is the result of non-returner not a nonexistent thing, or is the state of a worthy one not a nonexistent thing, or is a pratyekabuddha’s awakening not a nonexistent thing, or is the knowledge of path aspects not a nonexistent thing, up to or is the knowledge of all aspects not a nonexistent thing?”
 “Lord, the path is a nonexistent thing . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects are nonexistent things.”
 “Subhūti, well then, does a nonexistent phenomenon reach a nonexistent phenomenon?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “So then, Subhūti, that which is a nonexistent thing and that which is the path, both of those phenomena are neither conjoined with nor disjoined from anything, are formless, do not show themselves, are not obstructed, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. Therefore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means dissuade beings  who settle down on the aggregates, who settle down on an existent thing because of four errors—the perception of impermanence as permanence, the perception of suffering as happiness, the perception of the selfless as self, and the perception of the unclean as clean—from believing in an existent thing.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, is there some real basis called suchness and unmistaken suchness, that was or is, that foolish, ordinary people stand on and settle down on as ‘a real basis’; and if there is not, how do they accumulate karma, the type of karma on account of which they are not freed from the five forms of life in saṃsāra?”
 “Subhūti, no real basis at all has been set down, other than in error, where foolish ordinary persons stand and accumulate karma, not even as much as a part of the tip of a strand of hair. Therefore, Subhūti, to the extent possible I will explain this to you with an illustration in order to cover just this topic in more detail for the intelligent to understand. 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, when somebody dreaming a dream experiences a sense of gratification through the five sorts of sense objects, is there any corresponding real basis for the dreamer of the dream?”
 “Lord, if even just the dream is not there, how could there ever be a real basis where the dreamer of the dream stands and experiences a sense of gratification through the five sorts of sense objects?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, are there any compounded or uncompounded dharmas, with outflows or without outflows, that are not like a dream?”
 “Lord, there are not any compounded or uncompounded dharmas, with outflows or without outflows, that are not like a dream.” 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, in a dream are there the five forms of life in saṃsāra?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, in a dream is there any meditation on a path thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, that dharma is without a real basis, has no designation, and is not something designated by any utterances, stems, or inflected words.” 
The Lord then asked, “What do you think, Subhūti, is there any karma accumulated by the reflection seen on the surface of a mirror, on account of which it will become a being in hell, or in the animal world, or in the world of Yama, or a god, or a human?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, if that reflection itself, other than coaxing foolish ordinary persons into believing it is true, has no real basis, how could it ever have accumulated any karma, on account of which it becomes a being in hell, or in the animal world, or in the world of Yama, or a god, or a human?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is there any meditation on a path there, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, if even just that reflection has no real basis,  how could there be a meditation on a path there, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is there any karma accumulated by an echo echoing in a river valley, a verdant valley in the foothills, a dense jungle, or a mountain retreat, or from a crevice in a cliff, on account of which it becomes a being in hell, or in the animal world, or in the world of Yama, or a god, or a human, or a god living in the desire realm, or a god living in the form realm, up to or a god in the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, if even that echo itself has no real basis, how could it ever have accumulated any karma, on account of which it becomes a being in hell, or in the animal world, or in the world of Yama, or a god, or a human, or a god living in the desire realm, or a god living in the form realm, up to or a god in the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is there any meditation on a path in that echo, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, if even just that echo is absolutely not there, how could there be any meditation on a path there, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is there any karma accumulated by the perception of water in a mirage where there is no water, by the perception of a river where there is no river, by the perception of a city  where there is no city, or by the perception of a park where there is no park, on account of which it goes to hell, up to or goes to the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, when, other than being an error of perception, a state of visual delusion, there is absolutely no water in that mirage, there is no river, no city, and no park, how could it ever have accumulated any karma on account of which it goes to hell, up to or goes to the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is there any meditation on a path in that error of perception, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, if even just that error of perception is absolutely not there, how could there be a meditation on a path there, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, when a magician conjures up a variety of magical creations—conjures up a collection of elephants, or a collection of horses, or a collection of bulls, or a collection of foot soldiers, or a collection of chariots, or a woman’s body, or a man’s body—is there any karma accumulated in those magical creations, on account of which they would go to hell, up to or go to the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana?”
 “No, Lord.  Lord, when those magical creations have no real basis at all set down where they might stand and accumulate karma, not even as much as a part of the tip of a strand of hair, how could they ever have accumulated any karma, on account of which they would go to hell, up to or go to the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, in those magical creations is there any meditation on a path, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, if even just those creations themselves are absolutely not there, how could there be any meditation on a path there, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, when a tathāgata’s magical creation magically creates another magical creation, is there any karma accumulated in that magical creation, on account of which it would go to hell, up to or go to the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana?”
 “No, Lord. Lord, when that magical creation itself has no real basis, how could it ever have accumulated any karma, on account of which it would go to hell, up to or go to the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana?”
 “What do you think, Subhūti, in that magical creation is there any meditation on a path, thanks to which there would be no defilement and there would also be no purification?”
 “No, Lord.” 
 “Subhūti, is there any defilement or purification happening there?”
 “None at all, Lord,”
 “Subhūti, just as there is no defilement happening at all and just as there is no purification happening at all there, similarly there is no defilement or purification. And why? Because defilement happens and purification happens to those beings who live grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine,’ but for those with perfect vision, defilement does not happen and purification does not happen. And just as those with perfect vision do not become defiled and do not become purified, similarly there is no defilement or purification.” 
This was the eightieth chapter, “Teaching That There is No Defilement or Purification,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 81: Yogic Practice of the Ultimate
Then venerable Subhūti inquired of the Lord, “Lord, for someone who sees reality, defilement does not happen and purification does not happen, and even for someone who does not see reality, defilement does not happen and purification does not happen. This is because, Lord, all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. So, there is no defilement and there is no purification for something that does not exist, and there is no defilement and there is no purification even for something that does exist. Lord, if there is no defilement and there is no purification even for something that exists in itself,  and if there is no defilement and there is no purification even for something that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, well then, what is that purification the Lord has been speaking about?”
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “I have said that which is the sameness of all dharmas is purification.”
 “Lord, what is the sameness of all dharmas?” he asked.
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “that suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas—that establishment of dharmas, that dharma-constituent that remains as it is whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise—that, Subhūti, is called purification. Subhūti, that term is simply used conventionally by way of ordinary convention; it is inexpressible, not amenable to ordinary language, and inexpressible by verbal communication, sound, or word.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti inquired further of him, “Lord, if all dharmas are like an illusion, like a dream, like an echo, like an apparition, like a reflection in the mirror, like a mirage, like a city of the gandharvas, and like a magical creation, well then, how, given that dharmas are like an illusion, up to like a magical creation, are nonexistent things and are not materially existent, do bodhisattva great beings produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, thinking, ‘I will complete the perfection of giving,’ up to ‘I will complete the perfection of wisdom,’ and similarly, ‘I will complete the perfection of skillful means, the perfection of prayer, the perfection of power, the perfection  of knowledge, and the perfection of clairvoyance; I will complete absorption into the four concentrations, and I will complete the four immeasurables and four formless absorptions; I will cultivate the four applications of mindfulness, up to I will cultivate the eightfold noble path; I will gain the eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, great love, great compassion, confident readiness, and the dhāraṇī gateways; I will complete the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha and will gain . . . , up to the thirty-two major marks and eighty minor signs of a great person; I will complete the immeasurable light that causes an illumination pervading a great billionfold world system; and, having sought out the mental constructions of beings in world systems in the ten directions just by turning my mind to them, I will complete Brahmā’s melodious voice that will teach them the Dharma exactly according to their beliefs with a single melodious sound’?”
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “what do you think, those dharmas you have described, they are like an illusion, like a dream, like an echo, like an apparition, like a reflection in the mirror, like a mirage, like a city of the gandharvas, and like a magical creation, are they not?” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti said to him, “If those dharmas are like an illusion, like a dream, up to like a magical creation,  well then, Lord, how, given that those dharmas are like an illusion, like a dream, up to like a magical creation, would bodhisattva great beings have practiced the perfection of wisdom? Lord, an illusion, a dream, up to a magical creation are unreal, and, Lord, the unreal is unable to practice the perfection of giving, up to practice the perfection of wisdom, up to practice the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; similarly, the unreal is unable to practice . . . , up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha and fully awaken to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! The unreal is unable to practice the perfection of giving, up to practice the perfection of wisdom. The unreal is unable to practice . . . , up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. What do you think, Subhūti, does the perfection of giving fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, up to does the perfection of wisdom fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening? Do the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, the fourteen emptinesses, the noble truths, the concentrations, the immeasurables, the formless absorptions, the deliverances, the dhāraṇī gateways, emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness, the clairvoyances, up to the ten tathāgata powers, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! The perfection of giving does not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha do not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Subhūti, it is because all these dharmas have been brought into being and are the outcome of intentions, and the knowledge of all aspects cannot be reached through dharmas that have been brought into being and are the outcome of intentions.
 “But still, Subhūti, all those dharmas establish the path and bring about the path, even though they do not cause a result to be obtained. In those dharmas, what does not arise and does not stop is also what has no mark. Bodhisattva great beings, therefore, starting from the first production of the thought, are aware that those wholesome dharmas they undertake, whatever the wholesome dharma may be—the perfection of giving, up to or the perfection of wisdom, up to or the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—are all like an illusion. But without completing those dharmas—the perfection of giving, up to the perfection of wisdom, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—they cannot bring beings to maturity or reach the knowledge of all aspects, so whatever the wholesome dharma the bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  undertake, they are aware that all are like a dream, up to aware that all are like a magical creation. When they are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they are aware that . . . , up to the knowledge of all aspects is like a dream, up to aware that it is like a magical creation. They are aware that those beings too are practicing a practice like a dream, up to are practicing a practice like a magical creation. Therefore bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom apprehend all illusion-like phenomena as things that do not exist, and, apprehending them like that, accomplish the knowledge of all aspects, up to apprehend all magical creation-like phenomena as things that do not exist, and, apprehending them like that, reach the knowledge of all aspects. 
 “The perfection of giving cannot be grasped, up to the perfection of wisdom cannot be grasped, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha cannot be grasped, so bodhisattva great beings, knowing that all phenomena cannot be grasped, set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. And why? Because all phenomena are like a dream, up to like a magical creation, cannot be grasped and are things that do not exist, and, except that all beings do not know and do not see those phenomena, phenomena that cannot be grasped are not able to reach phenomena that cannot be grasped.
 “Therefore, bodhisattva great beings set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the sake of all beings. Starting from the first production of the thought, whatever gifts they give, they give all for the welfare of beings; whatever morality they guard, whatever patience they practice, whatever effort they make, whatever meditative stabilization they become absorbed in, and whatever wisdom  they cultivate, they cultivate all for the sake of beings, not for their own sake.
 “Bodhisattva great beings would not even set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening except for the sake of all beings. When they practice the perfection of wisdom, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom free beings stuck in the perception of a being where there is no being, stuck in the perception of self where there is no self—they free from these errors beings stuck in the perception of a creature, a child of Manu, one born of Manu, a living being, one who lives, a person, an individual, one who does, one who feels, one who makes someone else do, a motivator, one who motivates, one who knows, up to one who sees, up to where there is no one who sees. Having freed them from those errors, they establish them in the realm of immortality. Having established them there, habitual ideas do not arise and do not move about, so the habitual idea of a notion of self, up to the habitual idea of the notion of one who does, do not habitually occur. Having forsaken all that moving, shaking, false projection, and thought construction, they regularly become absorbed in and stay with a mind free from false projection.
 “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means do not personally settle down on any dharma at all, and also establish all beings in nonsettling as well, but as an ordinary convention, not ultimately.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, is the dharma a tathāgata  has fully awakened to, fully awakened to as an ordinary convention or as an ultimate?”
 “Subhūti, ‘a tathāgata has taught this dharma, a tathāgata has fully awakened to this dharma’ is a convention designated by ordinary language, because in ‘this dharma has fully awakened to that dharma’ there is nothing at all that can be apprehended. And why? Because ‘this dharma has fully awakened to that dharma’ falsely considers something a fact, because there is no attainment or clear realization at all dualistically.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if there is no attainment or clear realization at all dualistically, well then, is there an attainment and clear realization nondualistically?”
 “Subhūti, there is no clear realization dualistically and there is no clear realization nondualistically either. Here, where there is no duality and no nonduality, that is clear realization. And why? Because ‘this is clear realization; this clearly realizes’ is thought construction. In the sameness of dharmas there is no thought construction, because the absence of thought construction is the sameness of dharmas.”
 “Lord, given that dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, what is this ‘sameness of dharmas’?”
 “Subhūti, here where there is no existing thing, no intrinsic existence, and nothing that has been expressed, that is the sameness of dharmas. The sameness of dharmas is not something that can be expressed. Setting aside the sameness of dharmas, there is no dharma at all that can be apprehended. The sameness of dharmas has passed completely beyond  all dharmas. The sameness of dharmas is not the support and not within the range of simple folk or noble beings.”
 “Lord, is that sameness of dharmas not within the range even of a tathāgata?”
 “Subhūti, that sameness of dharmas is not within the range of all noble beings, and neither is it within the range of stream enterers, or once-returners, or non-returners, or worthy ones, or pratyekabuddhas, or bodhisattvas, or even tathāgatas.”
 “Lord, is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha not in control of the entire range of dharmas?”
 “Subhūti,” he replied, “were the sameness of dharmas one thing and a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha another, a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha might have control of the entire range of dharmas, but, Subhūti, that sameness that is the sameness of foolish, ordinary people, that sameness of faith followers and Dharma followers, that sameness of stream enterers, and similarly, connect this with that sameness of once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas, and that sameness of tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas—there is not the slightest difference in that sameness. The sameness of ordinary people and the sameness of noble beings is the same sameness. In a sameness that is the same, the duality ‘this is an ordinary person, up to this is  a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’ does not exist. In a sameness that is the same, those dharmas ‘this is an ordinary person, up to this is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’ all cannot be apprehended.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti said to him, “Lord, if, in the sameness of all dharmas, ‘this is an ordinary person, this is a stream enterer,’ up to ‘this is a pratyekabuddha, this is a bodhisattva,’ up to ‘this is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’ all cannot be apprehended, in that case foolish, ordinary people, faith followers and Dharma followers, stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and even tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas would not have specific features.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! In the sameness of dharmas, foolish, ordinary people, up to tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas do not have specific features.”
 “Lord, if, in the sameness of dharmas, foolish, ordinary people, faith followers, up to tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas do not have specific features, well then, Lord, from where do the Three Jewels—the Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel, and Saṅgha Jewel—appear in the world?” 
 “What do you think, Subhūti, is the Buddha Jewel one thing, the Dharma Jewel another, the Saṅgha Jewel another, and the sameness of dharmas yet another?”
 The Lord having asked that, venerable Subhūti said to him, “The way I understand the meaning of what you, Lord, have said, is that the Buddha Jewel is not one thing, the Dharma Jewel another, the Saṅgha Jewel another, and the sameness of dharmas yet another. That Buddha Jewel, that Dharma Jewel, that Saṅgha Jewel, and that sameness of dharmas—all those dharmas are not conjoined, are not disjoined, are formless, do not show themselves, and are not obstructed and have only one mark—that is, no mark. So, Lord, how has this presentation of dharmas that have no marks made by the Lord into ‘this is an ordinary person, this is a stream enterer, up to this is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha’ come about?”
 Venerable Subhūti having said that, the Lord asked him, “Subhūti, were a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha not to have awakened fully to complete awakening, and, having not fully awakened, not made a presentation of dharmas, would it be obvious that there is hell; would it be obvious that there is the animal world, the world of Yama, humans and gods; the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmakāyika, up to those  in the Naiva­saṃjñā­nāsaṃjñāyatana absorption; the four applications of mindfulness, up to the eightfold noble path; inner emptiness, and similarly, connect this with each, up to the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, up to the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha?” 
 “No, Lord.”
 “So then, Subhūti, that a tathāgata makes a presentation of dharmas without moving from the sameness of dharmas is their personal heroic power.”
 Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, is the way in which a tathāgata does not move from the sameness of dharmas how ordinary people, up to pratyekabuddhas do not move from the sameness of dharmas, and similarly how bodhisattvas do not move from the sameness of dharmas?”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! They do not move from the sameness of dharmas and do not pass beyond the sameness of dharmas. And why? Because just that suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, true nature of dharmas, dharma-constituent, establishment of dharmas, certification of dharmas, and very limit of reality of tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas is itself the suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, true nature of dharmas, dharma-constituent, establishment of dharmas, certification of dharmas, and very limit of reality of ordinary people, and just that is the suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, true nature of dharmas, dharma-constituent, establishment of dharmas, certification of dharmas, and very limit of reality of faith followers and Dharma followers, Aṣṭamakas, stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas—they all do not pass beyond the sameness of dharmas. And why? Because their suchness, unmistaken suchness,  unaltered suchness, true nature of dharmas, dharma-constituent, establishment of dharmas, certification of dharmas, and very limit of reality is just that—there is no other ‘sameness of dharmas’ than those.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti inquired further of him, “Lord, if just that true dharmic nature of all dharmas is just that true dharmic nature of ordinary people, and if the true dharmic nature of stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas is just that as well, in that case, Lord, given that those—namely, form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness—have different marks, given that the true dharmic nature of form is one thing, of feeling another, of perception another, of volitional factors another, and the true dharmic nature of consciousness another; the true dharmic nature of the eyes is one thing, and the true dharmic nature of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and thinking mind another; the true dharmic nature of a form one thing, and the true dharmic nature of a sound, a smell, a taste, a feeling, and dharmas another; the true dharmic nature of the earth element one thing, and the true dharmic nature of the water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element another; the true dharmic nature of greed, hatred, and confusion one thing, and the true dharmic nature of instances of views another; of the concentrations  another, of the immeasurables another, of the formless absorptions another; of the applications of mindfulness another, up to of the eightfold noble path another; of emptiness another, of signlessness another, of wishlessness another; of inner emptiness another, up to of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature another; of the deliverances another, of the absorptions another, of the tathāgata powers another, of the fearlessnesses another, of the detailed and thorough knowledges another, and of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha another; and given that the true dharmic nature of the compounded element is one thing, and of the uncompounded element another, in that case, Lord, how do those dharmas with different marks come to have one mark? How have bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom stayed there and made a differentiation of dharmas? Without making a differentiation of dharmas, bodhisattva great beings are not able to practice the perfection of wisdom, so, Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, go from level to level, enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, having entered into the secure state of a bodhisattva transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels, and having transcended them complete the perfection of the clairvoyances? How do bodhisattva great beings while playing with the clairvoyances complete the perfection of giving, up to complete the perfection of meditative stabilization; while playing, pass on from buddhafield  to buddhafield, attend on the lord buddhas and plant wholesome roots in relation to them, and with those wholesome roots bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield?”
 Venerable Subhūti having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, in regard to what you have said—‘If just that true dharmic nature of all dharmas is just that true dharmic nature of ordinary people, and if the true dharmic nature of tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas is just that as well, how is it right that those dharmas with different marks come to have the one mark of the true nature of dharmas?’—Subhūti, what do you think, is that which is the true dharmic nature of form not emptiness, up to is that which is the true dharmic nature of the Tathāgata not emptiness?”
 “It is emptiness, Lord.”
 “Well then, Subhūti, is there any dharma with a distinct mark apprehended in emptiness—form with a distinct mark, up to consciousness with a distinct mark, up to a tathāgata?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Subhūti, from just this explanation you should understand that in the true dharmic nature of dharmas there are no ordinary people and there is nothing other than ordinary people, up to there is no tathāgata and there is nothing other than the Tathāgata.”
 “Lord, is that true nature of dharmas a compounded phenomenon or is it an uncompounded phenomenon?”
 “Subhūti, it is not a compounded phenomenon and it is not an uncompounded phenomenon either. An uncompounded phenomenon other than a compounded phenomenon cannot be apprehended, and a compounded phenomenon other than an uncompounded phenomenon cannot be apprehended either. Therefore, Subhūti, both  those dharmas—the compounded element and the uncompounded element—are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark. A tathāgata employs this language according to ordinary convention, but not ultimately. In the ultimate there is no physical volitional factor, no verbal volitional factor, and no mental volitional factor, and in the ultimate something other than a physical volitional factor, verbal volitional factor, and mental volitional factor cannot be apprehended. That which is the sameness of compounded and uncompounded dharmas is the ultimate. 
 “Therefore, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not move from the ultimate, all the while doing the work that bodhisattvas have to do.” 
This was the eighty-first chapter, “Yogic Practice of the Ultimate,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 82: The Unchanging True Nature of Dharmas
Then venerable Subhūti asked the Lord, “Lord, if the sameness of all dharmas is empty of a basic nature, then no dharma does anything, so how, while dharmas are not doing anything and are not anything at all, do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom not move from the ultimate but still work for the welfare of beings by way of giving gifts, kind words, beneficial actions, and consistency between words and deeds?”
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! It is exactly as you say! Subhūti, emptiness does not do anything that has to be done or that does not have to be done; there is nothing at all. Yet, Subhūti, were these beings to understand this by themselves, in that case the Tathāgata would not, without moving from the ultimate, cause the separation of beings from the perception of self,  and having separated them, free them from saṃsāra with emptiness, or similarly, cause the separation of beings from the perception of a being, up to the perception of one who does; the notion of form, up to the perception of consciousness; the perception of eyes, up to the perception of thinking mind; the perception of the earth element, up to the perception of the consciousness element; the perception of compounded element, and having separated them, establish them in the uncompounded element of emptiness.”
 “Lord, of what is emptiness empty?”
 “Subhūti, whatever the perception of it, it is empty of that. Subhūti, when one magical creation has created another magical creation, is there any real thing there that is not empty?”
 “No, Lord. In a magical creation something real that is not emptiness does not exist. That which is the emptiness and that which is the magical creation are not joined and not disjoined—both those dharmas are empty of emptiness.”
 “Subhūti, what do you think, is there a contortion into ‘this is a magical creation; this is an emptiness’?”
 “No, Lord. And why? Because in emptiness, those dharmas ‘this is a magical creation’ and ‘this is an emptiness’ are not two.”
 “Subhūti, there is no form, or feeling, or perception, or volitional factors, or consciousness that is not a magical creation, and whatever is a magical creation is an emptiness,”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Lord, if those ordinary dharmas are magical creations, are these extraordinary dharmas—namely, the four applications of mindfulness,  four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path; and the ten tathāgata powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha—also magical creations? And their results, whatever they are, and those persons that appear on account of them—the stream enterer, once-returner, non-returner, worthy one, pratyekabuddha, bodhisattva, and tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha—are those dharmas magical creations as well?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, there where all dharmas are thus magical creations, some are magically created by śrāvakas, some are magically created by pratyekabuddhas, some are magically created by bodhisattvas, some are magically created by tathāgatas, some are magically created by afflictive emotions, and some are magically created by actions, so in that way all dharmas are like a magical creation.”
 “Lord, are this ‘abandonment,’ and those other dharmas—the result of stream enterer, result of once-returner, result of non-returner, and state of a worthy one—also magical creations? And are those other dharmas—the pratyekabuddha level, the buddha level, and the elimination of all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions—also magical creations?” 
 “Subhūti, whatever the dharma, be it a production or cessation, it is a magical creation.”
 “Lord, what is the dharma that is not a magical creation?”
 “Subhūti, that which has no production and no cessation is not a magical creation.”
 “And what, Lord, is that?” 
 “It is nirvāṇa—that which has the quality of not coaxing you into believing it is true. Those dharmas are not a magical creation.”
 “Lord, according to what you have said, Lord, that ‘not moving from emptiness and not stained by duality either there is no dharma at all that is not emptiness,’ then even that which has the dharma of not coaxing you into believing it is true, nirvāṇa, is magically created.”
 “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so! Subhūti, all dharmas are empty of an intrinsic nature. They have not been made by śrāvakas, have not been made by pratyekabuddhas, have not been made by bodhisattva great beings, and have not been made by tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. That which is empty of an intrinsic nature is nirvāṇa.” 
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, if a person who is beginning the work is going to understand the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, how should they be advised and instructed?”
 “Subhūti, does a thing that really existed before become a thing that does not exist later? Subhūti, here there is no existent thing, nor a nonexistent thing, and there is not something’s own existence, nor any existence from something else, so how will there ever be anything called ‘emptiness of an intrinsic nature’ that has to be understood?”
This was the eighty-second chapter, “The Unchanging True Nature of Dharmas,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 83: Categorization of a Bodhisattva’s Training
Then the bodhisattva great being Maitreya asked the Lord, “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who want to train in a bodhisattva’s training  train in form, and how do they train in feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; how do they train in the eye sense field, ear sense field, nose sense field, tongue sense field, body sense field, and thinking mind sense field; how do they train in the form sense field, sound sense field, smell sense field, taste sense field, feeling sense field, and dharma sense field; how do they train in the eye constituent, form constituent, and eye consciousness constituent, ear constituent, sound constituent, and ear consciousness constituent, nose constituent, smell constituent, and nose consciousness constituent, tongue constituent, taste constituent, and tongue consciousness constituent, body constituent, feeling constituent, and body consciousness constituent, and thinking mind constituent, dharma constituent, and thinking-mind consciousness constituent; how do they train in the eye contact sense field, and the ear, nose, tongue, body, and thinking-mind contact sense field; how do they train in ignorance, and how do they train in volitional factors, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, feeling, craving, appropriation, existence, birth, and old age and death; how do they train in the truth of suffering, and how do they train in the truth of origination, truth of cessation, and truth of the path; how do they train in dharmas that have form, and how do they train in those that are formless, show themselves and do not show themselves, and are obstructed and not obstructed, compounded and uncompounded, with outflows and without outflows, a basic immorality and not a basic immorality, to be resorted to  and not resorted to, vile and sublime, inner and outer, seen, heard, thought about, and known, past, present, and future, wholesome, unwholesome, and neutral, connected with the desire realm, connected with the form realm, connected with the formless realm, and not connected, in the dharmas of those in training and of those for whom there is no more training, in the dharmas of greed, rage, conceit, ignorance, view, and doubt; how do they train in miserliness and giving, immorality and morality, malice and patience, laziness and perseverance, distraction and concentration, and intellectual confusion and wisdom; how do they train in conceptualization and emptiness, a causal sign and signlessness, an improper wish and wishlessness, unpleasant dharmas, impermanence, suffering, and selflessness; and how do they train in affliction and the elimination of affliction, defilement and purification, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, awakening and the buddhadharmas?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who want to train in a bodhisattva’s training should train in ‘form is a mere name’; should train in ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness is a mere name’; up to ‘buddhadharmas are a mere name.’ ” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya said to him, “Lord,  when this—namely, the designation form,—is apprehended together with a basis; the designations feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are apprehended together with a basis; up to the designation buddhadharmas is apprehended together with a basis, having taken it as the causal sign of the volitional factors, how could bodhisattvas train in ‘form that is just a mere name’; how could they train in ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . . ,’ and ‘consciousness that is just a mere name’; up to ‘buddhadharmas that are just mere names’? And if a basis were not to exist, that name for it would also not be suitable to be just a mere name—that is, it would not be suitable that ‘form is just a mere name’; that is . . . , ‘feeling . . . ,’ ‘perception . . . ,’ ‘volitional factors . . .’ and ‘consciousness is just a mere name’; it would not be suitable that . . . , up to ‘buddhadharmas is just a mere name.’ ” 
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having said that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, this—namely, form—is a name plucked out of thin air; these—namely, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness—are names plucked out of thin air; up to this—namely, buddhadharmas—is a name plucked out of thin air for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon.”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, is it not the case that in the absence of the name form, there is no being aware of, realizing, or knowing the name form through a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, but through that name form there is awareness of, realizing, and knowing a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon?  So how could this be—namely, ‘form is a name plucked out of thin air for the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon’? Lord, is it not the case that there is no being aware of, realizing, or knowing the name feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness through that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon; up to Lord, is it not the case that there is no being aware of the name buddhadharmas through that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, but through that feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to through that buddhadharmas, there is awareness of, realizing, and knowing just that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon? So how could this be—namely, ‘form . . .’; namely, ‘feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness . . .’; up to namely, ‘buddhadharmas is a name plucked out of thin air for the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon’?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “So then, Maitreya, I will ask you a question, and you, as much as you can bear it, must find an answer. Maitreya, what do you think—without resorting to, without standing on, without having to stand on the designation form for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, do you think this—namely, ‘this is form’—about this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Maitreya, what do you think—without resorting to, without standing on, without having to stand on the designation feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, up to on this—namely, the designation buddhadharmas— for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, do you think this—namely, ‘feeling,’ ‘perception,’ ‘volitional factors,’ and ‘consciousness’; up to ‘buddhadharmas’—about this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “From this one of many explanations, Maitreya, you should thus know that these—namely, form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness—are names plucked out of thin air for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon; up to also this—namely buddhadharmas—is a name plucked out of thin air for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon.
 “Maitreya, what do you think, do a variety of kinds of words, conventional terms, conventional labels, and designations designate, or conventionally refer to, or label, or apply to this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon?”
 “It is so, Lord.” 
 “From this one of many explanations, Maitreya, you should thus know that this—namely, form; that these—namely feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to that this—namely, buddhadharmas—is a name plucked out of thin air for that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon.
 “Maitreya, what do you think—here, does someone designate, or name, or give a subsequent conventional designation to, or apply to just that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon a name for a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon different from it?”
 “It is so, Lord.” 
 “From this one of many explanations too, Maitreya, you should thus know that this—namely, form; that these—namely, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to that this—namely, buddhadharmas—is a name plucked out of thin air.” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “In that case, Lord, would it not then be just that basis that is the causal sign of a compounded phenomenon that is apprehended as the form entity, based on which this—form; these—feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to buddhadharmas—is a designation, name, label, and subsequent conventional designation?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord asked him in return, “Maitreya, what do you think, is the basis that is the causal sign of a compounded phenomenon when form is designating, conventionally referring to, naming, or working as a subsequent conventional designation for form, the form entity, or is it simply merely designated?” 
 “Lord, it is simply merely designated.”
 “Well then, Maitreya, how could you think, Maitreya, that it is just that basis that is the causal sign of a compounded phenomenon that is apprehended as the form entity, based on which these—namely, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to buddhadharmas—is a designation, name, label, and subsequent conventional designation? Maitreya, what do you think, is the feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to or buddhadharmas entity simply merely designated?”
 “Lord, it is simply merely designated.”
 “Well then, how could you think, Maitreya, that it is just that feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to or buddhadharmas entity that is apprehended?” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him,  “In that case, Lord, if form is simply just a designation, name, conventional term, label, and conventional designation, and if feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas is simply just a designation, name, conventional term, label, and conventional designation, would it not just be the form entity . . . ; and then, would it not just be the feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas entity that is apprehended as designation, name, conventional term, label, and conventional designation?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord asked him in return, “Maitreya, what do you think, is that form that is simply just a designation, name, conventional term, label, and conventional designation produced or stopped, or defiled or purified?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Well then, Maitreya,” he asked, “how could you have thought ‘would it not just be the form entity that is apprehended’?
 “Maitreya, what do you think, is that feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , consciousness . . . , up to buddhadharmas that is simply just a designation, name, conventional term, label, and conventional designation produced or stopped, or defiled or purified?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Well then, Maitreya,” he asked, “how could you have thought ‘would it not just be the feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , consciousness . . . , up to buddhadharmas entity that is apprehended’?” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, does form just not exist at all? Is it without any mark at all? Lord, does feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , consciousness . . . , up to do buddhadharmas not exist at all? Are they without any marks at all?” 
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, I do not say ‘form just does not exist at all without any mark at all.’ Maitreya, I do not say ‘feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas just do not exist at all without any marks at all.’ ”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “How then, Lord, does form exist? How then, Lord, does feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , consciousness . . . , up to how do buddhadharmas exist?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, form exists as an ordinary term and convention, but not ultimately. Maitreya, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas exist as ordinary terms and conventions, but not ultimately.”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya said to him, “Lord, the way I understand what you have said, Lord, is that this element is ultimately inexpressible. Lord, if that inexpressible element  ultimately exists, then how can it be a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon designated by the name form plucked out of thin air; if it ultimately exists, then how can it be a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon designated by the name feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to or buddhadharmas plucked out of thin air? And if ultimately it does not exist, then how could it be an inexpressible element, because it is not suitable to call a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon an ‘inexpressible element.’ ”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having said that, the Lord said to him, “So then, Maitreya, I will ask you a question, and you, as much as you can bear it, must find an answer. Maitreya, what do you think—when abiding in the correct practice of wisdom connected with the inexpressible element, do you apprehend this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon that has been designated by the name form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to or buddhadharmas, plucked out of thin air?”
 “Lord, I do not apprehend it,” he replied.
 “From this one of many explanations, Maitreya,” he continued, “you should know that this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon is not the inexpressible element and the inexpressible element is not other than this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon. This basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon designated by these—namely, the names form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas plucked out of thin air—if they are taken to be the inexpressible element, well then, all foolish ordinary people would be in nirvāṇa,  and would even have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Maitreya, if the inexpressible element is taken to be other than this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, well then, given that even the causal sign would not be apprehended, in this case would there be a realization of that inexpressible element? 
 “From this one of many explanations, Maitreya, you should know that the inexpressible element is not other than this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon that has been designated by these—namely, the names form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas plucked out of thin air— and that the inexpressible element is not not other than those either.”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, if, when bodhisattvas are abiding in the correct practice of wisdom connected with the inexpressible element, this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon that has been designated by the names form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas plucked out of thin air is not apprehended, is existence not apprehended, or is nonexistence not apprehended?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon has no independence or existence at all. And why? Maitreya, when you conceive of that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon is that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon gotten hold of through the conceptualizations, or, when you are abiding in the correct practice of wisdom connected with the inexpressible element and do not conceive of it,  is it gotten hold of through the absence of conceptualization?”
 “It is, Lord.”
 “If that is so, Maitreya, that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon that has been thus designated by these—namely, the names form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas plucked out of thin air—is simply just conceptualization or just a conceptual state. When they are thus abiding in the nonconceptual element free from conceptualizations, what existence does it, designated by these—namely, the names form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas plucked out of thin air—have? What existence can be apprehended?”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, how many designations for the separate aspects of form should bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom, involved in skillfully making a differentiation of a dharma, know? How many designations for the separate aspects of feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas should they know?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom, involved in skillfully making a differentiation of a dharma, should know three designations for the separate modes of form, and should know three designations for the separate modes of feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas, namely, ‘this is imaginary form,’ ‘this is conceptualized form,’  and ‘this is the true dharmic nature of form’; ‘this is imaginary feeling,’ ‘this is conceptualized feeling,’ and ‘this is the true dharmic nature of feeling’; ‘this is imaginary perception,’ ‘this is conceptualized perception,’ and ‘this is the true dharmic nature of perception’; ‘these are imaginary volitional factors,’ ‘these are conceptualized volitional factors,’ and ‘this is the true dharmic nature of the volitional factors’; ‘this is imaginary consciousness,’ ‘this is conceptualized consciousness,’ and ‘this is the true dharmic nature of consciousness’; up to ‘these are imaginary buddhadharmas,’ ‘these are conceptualized buddhadharmas,’ and ‘this is the true dharmic nature of buddhadharmas.’ ”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, what is imaginary form, what is conceptualized form, and what is the true dharmic nature of form; what is imaginary feeling . . . ,  . . . perception, . . . volitional factors,  . . . consciousness; up to . . . buddhadharmas, what are conceptualized buddhadharmas, and what is the true dharmic nature of buddhadharmas?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, based on the designation, name, label, and conventional designationform for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, this imagining that it is the intrinsic nature of form is imaginary form. Maitreya, based on the designations, names, labels, and conventional designationsfeeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, up to buddhadharmas for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, this imagining that it is the intrinsic nature of feeling, or it is the intrinsic nature of perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, up to buddhadharmas, is imaginary feeling; is imaginary perception, volitional factors, and consciousness; up to are imaginary buddhadharmas.
 “That basis, which is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, an expression dependent on conceptualization established in the true dharmic nature of mere conceptualization, for which the designations, names, labels, and conventional designations ‘this is form,’ ‘this is feeling,’ ‘this is perception,’ ‘this is a volitional factor,’ ‘this is consciousness,’ up to ‘these are buddhadharmas’ are used—this is conceptualized form, this is conceptualized feeling, this is conceptualized perception, this is a conceptualized volitional factor, this is conceptualized consciousness, up to these are conceptualized buddhadharmas.
 “This true nature of dharmas that simply remains whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, the element of the establishment of dharmas that is just the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature—falsely imagined form as that conceptualized form—for a time that is eternally eternal and constantly constant, the nonexistence of a self in dharmas, suchness, and the very limit of reality, is the true dharmic nature of form; this is also the true dharmic nature of feeling, this is the true dharmic nature of perception, this is the true dharmic nature of volitional factors, this is the true dharmic nature of consciousness, up to and this is the true dharmic nature of the buddhadharmas.”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, among these three forms, which form is viewed  as a nonmaterial reality and which as a material reality, and which as neither a nonmaterial reality nor a material reality and in the category of the ultimate? Among these three feelings, and among these three perceptions, these three volitional factors, and these three consciousnesses, up to and these three buddhadharmas, which are viewed as a nonmaterial reality and which as a material reality, and which as neither a nonmaterial reality nor a material reality and in the category of the ultimate?” 
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, view the form that is imaginary as not a material reality. View conceptualized form as a material reality based on the material reality of a conceptualization, but not because it is there under its own power. And view the true dharmic nature of form as neither a nonmaterial reality nor a material reality and in the category of the ultimate. View the feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness that is imaginary . . . , up to the buddhadharmas that are imaginary as not a material reality. View the feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness that is conceptualized . . . , up to the buddhadharmas that are conceptualized as a material reality based on the material reality of a conceptualization, but not because they are there under their own power. Maitreya, view the true dharmic nature of feeling . . . , perception . . . , volitional factors . . . , and consciousness . . . , up to Maitreya, view the true dharmic nature of the buddhadharmas as neither a nonmaterial reality nor a material reality and in the category of the ultimate.” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, given that there is such a designation for differentiated form, and given there is such a designation for differentiated feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, up to buddhadharmas, this that the Lord has said—namely, ‘anything called form is counted as not two’—and this—namely, ‘anything called feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness, up to buddhadharmas is counted as not two’—in regard to that, what did the Lord have in mind when the Lord said this—namely, ‘anything called form is counted as not two’—and this—namely, ‘anything called feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness up to buddhadharmas—is counted as not two’?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord asked him in return, “Maitreya, what do you think, is the absence of material reality in imaginary form, form, or is it not?”
 “It is not, Lord.”
 “Is then form just the mere designation, name, label, and conventional designationform for it?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Maitreya, through this one of many explanations, you should know that imaginary form is not form and is not not form either, and that which is not form and is not not form is counted as nondual. That was what I had in mind when I said this—namely, ‘anything called form is counted as not two.’
 “Maitreya, what do you think,  is conceptualized form, the material reality, dependent on which this name, designation, and convention is used, not form?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Maitreya, what do you think, is that imaginary form of just that conceptualized form—that which is not its intrinsic nature, not its defining mark—form?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Maitreya, also through this one of many explanations, you should know that conceptualized form is not form and is not not form either, and that which is not form and is not not form is counted as nondual. That was what I had in mind when I said this—namely, ‘anything called form” is counted as not two.’
 “Maitreya, what do you think, is that true dharmic nature of form, form in the category of selflessness, form?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Is that true dharmic nature of form that is just that true dharmic nature of form, form?”
 “No, Lord.”
 “Maitreya, also through this one of many explanations, you should know that the true dharmic nature of form is not form and is not not form either, and that which is not form and is not not form is counted as nondual. That was what I had in mind when I said this—namely, ‘anything called form is counted as not two.’ Similarly, connect this with feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, up to the buddhadharmas.” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya  asked him, “Lord, how should they view the mark of comprehension, how the mark of abandonment, how the mark of actualization, and how the mark of cultivation of bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom who, having avoided the two extremes and set forth on the middle way, have such a skill in the nondual mark of form, and such a skill in the absence of marks in feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to buddhadharmas?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom who, avoiding the two extremes, have set forth on the middle way, neither comprehend nor do not comprehend form, and just that is their comprehension; they neither comprehend nor do not comprehend feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to or buddhadharmas, and just that is their comprehension. They neither abandon nor do not abandon form and just that is their abandonment; they neither abandon nor do not abandon feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to or buddhadharmas, and just that is their abandonment. They neither actualize nor do not actualize an abandonment of form and just that is their actualization; they neither cultivate the path nor do not cultivate the path in order to abandon form, and just that is their cultivation. Similarly, connect this with feeling, perception, volitional factors, consciousness, up to and the buddhadharmas.”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, what is the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom endowed with such comprehension, abandonment, actualization, and cultivation?”
 The bodhisattva Maitreya having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Maitreya, the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas is deep, extremely deep.”
 “Lord, why is the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas so deep, so extremely deep?”
 “Maitreya,” replied the Lord, “it is because the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas is neither nirvāṇa nor not nirvāṇa; that is why it is called ‘deep, extremely deep.’ ”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, how is the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas neither nirvāṇa nor not nirvāṇa?”
 “Maitreya,” replied the Lord, “taking the welfare of others as the point of departure, it is not nirvāṇa because they do not totally reject saṃsāra; taking their own welfare as the point of departure, it is not not nirvāṇa because they do not totally reject nirvāṇa.”
 “Lord, if, taking the welfare of others as the point of departure,  bodhisattvas do not totally reject saṃsāra, by not totally rejecting saṃsāra how do they not totally reject nirvāṇa? Lord, if, taking their own welfare as the point of departure, bodhisattvas do not totally reject nirvāṇa, how do they not totally reject saṃsāra?”
 The Lord said, “Here bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom do not even conceive of saṃsāra as actually saṃsāra, and do not even conceive of nirvāṇa as actually nirvāṇa. So, because they thus do not conceptualize those two—namely, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa—they are the same and equal. And why? Because they do not conceive of saṃsāra as actually saṃsāra, so they do not become repulsed by saṃsāra. Similarly, because they do not conceive of nirvāṇa as actually nirvāṇa, their nirvāṇa does not degenerate; and similarly, even in saṃsāra, it does not degenerate. Thus, you should know that for this reason they are located in a realm without thought construction and neither totally reject saṃsāra nor totally reject nirvāṇa.”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Well then, Lord, will it not be the case that just as bodhisattvas standing in the realm without thought construction practicing the perfection of wisdom have not totally rejected a life in saṃsāra they will similarly not have appropriated it, and just as they have not totally rejected nirvāṇa they will similarly not have appropriated that, either? And Lord, if there is no appropriation, how can there be no rejection?” 
 “Maitreya,” replied the Lord, “I do not say they ‘appropriate’ or ‘do not appropriate’ a life in saṃsāra like this. Rather, Maitreya,  because bodhisattvas practicing the perfection of wisdom exhibit a life in saṃsāra through skillful means when they have gained control over their minds through the knowledge that has the realm without thought construction as its objective support, I say about bodhisattvas in world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in world systems in the ten directions who have passed into nirvāṇa that ‘they do not reject a life in saṃsāra.’ And because they remain in emptiness, in the realm that gives no basis for apprehending anything, I say ‘they do not reject nirvāṇa’ ”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, how in the absence of conceptualization should the collection of marks be viewed?”
 “Maitreya,” replied the Lord, “that which is form, and that which is feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, up to that which is the buddhadharmas, and that which is the emptiness of up to the buddhadharmas—that which is the nonduality and nonelaboration of an existent thing and a nonexistent thing in those dharmas and those emptinesses—that, Maitreya, should be viewed as the collection of marks in the absence of conceptualization.” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, are all śrāvakas absolutely with certainty located in nirvāṇa?” 
 “No, Maitreya,” replied the Lord. “And why? Because this world has various elements, it has multiple elements, so in this world that has various elements and multiple elements, many families and dispositions of beings can be found. Maitreya, there is one sort of family of beings, those who from the start strive for a superior qualification, who gain  just the superior qualification; there is one sort of family of beings, those who from the start strive for an inferior qualification, who are satisfied by gaining just the inferior; and there is one sort of family of beings who from the start strive for an inferior qualification, gain the inferior, understand that it is lacking, are not satisfied just by that, and then strive for the superior qualification and gain the superior.” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked him, “Lord, someone in the third family of beings, having reached the state of a worthy one, strives for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening but does not take rebirth, so how do they reach it? The Lord has not said the practice itself is their rebirth.”
 “Maitreya,” replied the Lord, “I do not say that their rebirth is dictated by karma and afflictive emotion; I say that theirs is an inconceivable rebirth, magically created and dedicated.”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya said to him, “Lord, how incredible the vast aspiration, the great surpassing aspiration of bodhisattva great beings who thus from the start strive to be truly exceptional and become truly exceptional must be. Lord, what is the vast aspiration, what is the great surpassing aspiration of bodhisattva great beings?”
 “Maitreya,” replied the Lord, “that those bodhisattvas do not strive to be a Śatakratu, to be a Brahmā, to be a world protector, to be a wheel-turning emperor, or to have any ordinary success at all—  that those bodhisattvas have no attachment to those and are free from grasping at them is their vast aspiration. And that bodhisattvas want all beings to share in common the happiness of nonattachment, the happiness free from grasping, and the happiness of nirvāṇa, and that they make a dedication to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, which is to say, they do not give up volitional factors, is to be seen as their truly great surpassing aspiration.” 
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva Maitreya said to him, “Lord, the bodhisattva dharmas are amazing and marvelous; the bodhisattva training is amazing and marvelous. Lord, a son of a good family or daughter of a good family who wants to train in the amazingly marvelous bodhisattva dharmas should produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
This was the eighty-third chapter, “Categorization of a Bodhisattva’s Training,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 84: Collection
Furthermore, the Lord, yet again teaching this perfection of wisdom in order to cause a great joy in those four retinues, at that time spoke these verses:
With the finest liking, respect, and serene confidence 
That clear away obscuring afflictions and pass beyond stains,
Listen to this perfection of wisdom of the brave, 
Practiced by heroes who have set out for the sake of the world.
All the rivers flowing here in Jambudvīpa, 
Which make medicinal plants and forests with flowers and fruit grow,
Have their source in the powerful nāga who rules in Lake Anavatapta, 
And are all that Nāga-Lord’s glorious power.
So too all doctrine that the Victor’s hearers teach, 
Explain, and logically expound, the attainment of a supreme 
Noble state of happiness and its results—all these 
Are the Tathāgata’s personal heroic power. 
And why? Because the finest people in the form of his disciples 
Train in the kinds of Dharma the Victor teaches, 
And having realized them, teach as they trained. 
This is done by the power of the Buddha, not by the power of their own strength.
Those who have no perplexity or fear when hearing
That the finest perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended, 
A bodhisattva cannot be apprehended, the thought of awakening 
Cannot be apprehended—those bodhisattvas practice the wisdom of the sugatas. 
They have no form, no feeling, no perception, no intention—
Not even an atom’s worth of a place for consciousness to stand.
They do not stand on any dharmas, they live without a dwelling place, 
And, not grasping, they find the awakening of the sugatas. 
Just as the mendicant Śreṇika with his knowledge apprehends nothing 
And the disintegration of the aggregates occurs,
So too the bodhisattvas comprehend the dharmas
And do not touch nirvāṇa—they dwell in wisdom.
 “What is this wisdom? Whose is it? Where is it from?”
They consider that all these dharmas are empty.
Looking closely, they are not cowed and are not scared—
Those bodhisattvas are close to awakening.
But if without wisdom they make a practice 
Of the form, perception, feeling, intention, and consciousness aggregates, 
And imagine the aggregates to be empty, they practice causal signs. 
Their faith is not in what does not arise and does not stop.
Not in form or feeling, not in perception or intention, 
Not practicing in consciousness, wandering without a place to stay, 
With steady wisdom not apprehending “one is practicing,” with an awareness of nonproduction
They touch the most excellent calm meditative stabilization.
Those bodhisattvas who thus abide here personally at peace
Have been prophesied by the previous tathāgatas. They do not falsely project 
“I have entered into meditative equipoise” or “I have emerged.”
And why? Because they have comprehended the basic nature of dharmas.
When practicing like that they practice the wisdom of the sugatas.
And because they comprehend that no practice is the practice,
They do not even apprehend the Dharma that they practice—
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
That which does not exist is called nonexistent.
Fools have imagined it and fashion it as existing and not existing.
Dharmas are not these two—existing and not existing.
Bodhisattvas who know that will go forth.
Those who know that these five aggregates are like an illusion,
And do not make illusion one thing and the aggregates another,
Free from the perception of variety, practicing at peace—
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
Those with spiritual friends, with special insight,
Do not get scared when listening to the Mother of Victors.
Those with bad friends, placing their trust in others,
Break apart like an unfired pot coming into contact with water.
Why are they called a bodhisattva? 
They want to cut attachments, to extinguish attachments everywhere, 
And touch the awakening of the victors that is without attachment.
Therefore they get the name bodhisattva.
Why then are they called a great being?
They will become foremost in a great mass of beings.
They chop down the many views of a mass of beings.
Therefore, they get called a great being.
Greatly generous, with great intellect and great power,
They have set out in the supreme Great Vehicle of the victors, 
And buckled on the great armor to conquer Māra’s deceit.
Therefore, they are called a great being.
As when a magician at a crossroads conjures 
The illusion of many people and severs ten million heads,
The bodhisattvas know that, like those victims, all beings
Are like illusions, and so have no fear.
Form, feeling, perception, intention, and consciousness 
Are not bound, are not freed, and are not real.
Therefore, the uncowed ones set out for awakening.
This is the finest armor of the best people.
Why is it called the awakening vehicle? 
It is because having mounted on it causes all beings to enter nirvāṇa;
This vehicle is a space-like celestial mansion, the finest vehicle 
In which they reach happiness, the state of bliss, and security. 
You cannot find a direction in which those who mount on it go. 
They are said to go to nirvāṇa but you cannot find where they went,
Just like when a fire goes out, it does not go anywhere,
And that is the reason it is said to be nirvāna.
Bodhisattvas purified of the three time periods 
Do not apprehend a prior limit, a later limit, or a present. 
Those who are purified are uncompounded and without thought construction.
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
When smart bodhisattvas think about nonproduction, 
At that time, practicing like that, they generate
Great compassion, but without a perception of beings.
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
If bodhisattvas have a perception of a being, a perception of suffering,
Think, “I will eliminate suffering and benefit beings,” 
Or conceive of a self and beings,
This is not the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
Knowing that just as they are, all beings are like that too;
Knowing that just as all beings are, all dharmas are like that too;
Not entertaining the idea of either production or nonproduction—
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
Having eliminated a production and a beyond in all
The dharma-names, as many as there are, spoken in all the worlds, 
A perfect, matchless knowledge that does not die is gained.
Therefore, it is called the perfection of wisdom.
You should know that bodhisattvas are those who practice 
Like that without hesitation, endowed with wisdom, abiding in sameness.
Comprehending that dharmas are without a basic nature 
Is practicing the finest perfection of wisdom.
Those who do not stand in form and do not stand in feeling, 
In perception, or in intention, who do not stand 
In consciousness—they stand in the true nature of dharmas.
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
They do not stand in permanent or impermanent, 
Happiness or suffering, clean or dirty, self or selfless, 
Or in suchness, and similarly they do not stand in emptiness, 
The attainment of the results, the worthy one level, the pratyeka level, or the buddha level.
Just as the Leader does not stand in the uncompounded element,
Does not stand in the compounded element, and wanders without a home,
So too the Victor says the bodhisattva who stands like that stands,
Not standing on a place to stand, standing without standing.
Those who want to become a tathāgata’s śrāvaka, 
A pratyekabuddha, and similarly a Dharma king,
Cannot do so without relying on this forbearance,
Like going from this shore to that shore without seeing the dock. 
The Tathāgata says teaching and listening to the Dharma
And what is taught, the results obtained, 
The pratyekabuddha, and the lord of the world too, the nirvāṇa 
Those with clear intelligence obtain—they are all like illusions.
These four persons are not scared of that: 
The victor’s child skilled in the truths, the irreversible, the worthy one 
Who has cleared away the dirt and eliminated doubt,
And the fourth, who is the one looked after by spiritual friends.
Smart bodhisattvas practicing like that do not train 
In the worthy one level, nor in the pratyekabuddha level, 
But train in the buddhadharmas for the sake of all-knowledge. 
Those not training in training and not training are training.
The training is not done for the increase, reduction, or appropriation
Of form, nor for the appropriation of the variety of dharmas.
While training they get hold of all-knowledge. This emergence 
Is the training of those who take pleasure in the qualities.
Form is not wisdom, wisdom is not in form;
These—consciousness, perception, feeling, and intention—
Are not wisdom and also wisdom is not in them.
It is equal to the space element, without distinction.
The basic nature of those objective supports is boundless,
The basic nature of beings is boundless,
The basic nature of the space element is boundless,
And the wisdom of the knowers of worlds is boundless too. 
The Leader proclaims that perception is the near shore. 
When perception, having disintegrated, has been abandoned,
One crosses to the far shore. Those who have subsequently attained this freedom 
From perception, having crossed over, stand in the Teacher’s words. 
Even if the Teacher were to remain for as many eons as there are 
Sand particles in the Gaṅgā River proclaiming the word being,
However could beings, pure from the beginning, be born? 
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
The Victor said, “When I had become a speaker in harmony
With this finest perfection, the finest person 
Of an earlier time made a prophecy that
I would in the future become a buddha.”
Poison, weapons, fire, and water do not overpower,
And Māra and those on Māra’s side find no way to cause trouble 
To those who respectfully take up and master 
This perfection of wisdom, the protectors’ practice.
Were someone who worships the stūpa of a sugata 
Who has passed into nirvāṇa, made of the seven precious stones,
To fill a hundred thousand one hundred million regions 
With as many of those stūpas as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River,
And, theoretically, were all those beings, as many as there are, 
Living in an infinity of one hundred million regions to do 
Nothing else but worship them with divine flowers, the finest incense,
And fragrance for eons during the three time periods, or even longer,
Still, were someone to write down in a book this mother of the sugatas 
From which the ten powers of the leaders arise, bear it in mind, 
And honor it with flowers and fragrances, the merit created from worshiping the stūpas 
That have been made would not approach that merit even by a fraction. 
This perfection of wisdom of the victors is a great knowledge mantra
Relieving the phenomena of pain and suffering of great masses of beings.
Having trained in this knowledge mantra, those protectors of the past 
In worlds in the ten directions became unsurpassed doctor-kings.
Those who practice a practice of benefit together with compassion 
Train in this knowledge mantra; they are smart and touch awakening. 
You should know that the happinesses that are compounded and the happinesses 
That are uncompounded, all those happinesses issue forth from this.
Seeds are sown, lodge in the earth, and are ready to sprout.
They grow up in a variety of forms when conditions are complete. 
The five perfections and the qualities of awakening, 
As many as there are, all grow from the perfection of wisdom.
On whichever path a wheel-turning emperor travels, 
All the seven precious treasures and the mass of forces always travel on that very path too. 
Wherever the Victor’s perfection of wisdom travels, 
Right there all the dharmas—the good qualities—travel along too.
Śatakratu responded when questioned by the Victor:
If the buddhafields, as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, 
Were all to be filled right to the top with the physical remains of the tathāgatas,
Still I would take just his perfection of wisdom. 
And why? Not because I do not respect the physical remains,
But because they are worshiped for being suffused by wisdom. 
Just as a person who is supported by the king receives worship, 
The physical remains of the tathāgatas are supported by perfect wisdom.
A casket graced by a priceless precious jewel endowed 
With good qualities is worthy of reverence, and even after 
It has been taken out you take pleasure in the casket.
The good qualities are those of that precious jewel.
Similarly, even when a victor has passed into nirvāṇa, the physical remains
Invite worship because of the good qualities of the finest perfection of wisdom.
So those who want to appropriate a victor’s good qualities 
Should take hold of this perfection of wisdom. It is freedom. 
Wisdom is the leader for giving gifts, so too for morality, 
Patience, perseverance, and concentration. 
It is the help so that wholesome dharmas will not be lost.
It shows the single way of all dharmas. 
To illustrate, there are a thousand one hundred million trees in Jambudvīpa
In many forms, of various kinds and various types,
But still there are not various kinds of shadows; there is no difference
Apart from talking about the number of things that have become shaded.
Similarly, these five perfections of a victor 
Get the very name perfection of wisdom. 
When they have been dedicated to all-knowledge,
All six of them become the single taste called awakening.
If bodhisattvas who are unaware explain form, 
Feeling, perception, intention, and consciousness as 
Impermanent, they are engaged in a counterfeit.
The learned never ever make dharmas perish.
Knowing the mode in which all dharmas are unproduced and empty,
Where form is not apprehended, nor feeling, nor perception, 
Nor consciousness, nor intention is apprehended,
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
The merit of someone who has written out this perfection of wisdom 
And bestowed it on an excellent being is superior to someone 
Who has led all the beings, as many as there are, in as many regions 
As there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the state of a worthy one.
And why? Because, having trained in this, the most excellent speakers
Make all phenomena known here in emptiness,
And, having listened to them, śrāvakas will quickly touch freedom, 
Touch a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and a buddha’s awakening.
Without seeds there would be no trees in the world,
So how would there be branches, blossoms, and fruit there?
Without the thought of awakening there would be no victors possible in the world,
So how could there be the results, Śatakratus, Brahmās, and śrāvakas? 
When the circle of the sun sends forth its latticework of light, 
Beings work hard at the work they have to do.
When the thought of awakening comes to be in the world for the sake of the knowledge of the wise,
By means of knowledge, beings become endowed with the dharmas—the good qualities.
To illustrate, were the Nāga Lord not to be in Anavatapta
How would the rivers in this Jambudvīpa ever flow?
Without the rivers there would be no blossoms or fruit, 
And there would not be the many-colored jewels in the oceans.
So too, when there is no thought of awakening here,
How will there ever be the knowledge of a sugata in all these worlds?
And when there is no knowledge there is no increase in good qualities, 
No awakening, and no ocean-like buddhadharmas. 
A single ray of light from the circle of the sun is far greater than 
All the light emitted by all the light-making insects in this world.
All the light of the mass of light-makers
Is not even a fraction of it.
The mass of merit that the śrāvaka communities, as many as there are, create,
Associated with giving, morality, and meditation, 
That mass of merit that the śrāvaka communities create is not even a fraction
Of what a bodhisattva’s single thought of rejoicing creates. 
All the merits of those past hundred million billion buddhas in times gone by, 
Of the thousand hundred million presently standing in infinitely many buddhafields,
Of all the world protectors who have passed into nirvāṇa,
And from the teaching of the precious Dharma that puts an end to suffering—
All the merits of those victors,
From their first generation of the production of the thought of supreme awakening 
Up until the time the good Dharma of the leaders is extinguished—
The endowment of the perfections, all the buddhadharmas,
All the buddha’s children, the śrāvakas, 
Trainees and nontrainees, the good with outflows, 
And without—the bodhisattvas gather it all together, rejoice in it, 
And dedicate it all to awakening as a catalyst for the welfare of the world. 
If the dedication occurs with a perception of a thought, a perception of an awakening, 
And a perception of a dedication and beings, it does not rank as a dedication, 
Because it apprehends something, because a perception 
Is based on wrong view, and the mind is triply attached.
If such dharmas as these stop and come to an end, 
If that to which the dedication is made comes to an end,
If there is an understanding that no dharma ever dedicates to any dharma, 
In that case the dedication has been made with awareness. 
If it is done with causal signs it is not a dedication, 
But if it is done without causal signs it is a dedication to awakening. 
The Victor has said that falsely apprehending a bright dharma as a fact 
Is like eating good food mixed with poison.
Therefore, the dedication in which they have to train is like this. 
And the rejoicing and dedication should be in line with what
Those victors know to be the type, origin, 
And mark of the wholesome, exactly like that.
If merits are thus dedicated to awakening, one is not poisoned,
Does not forsake the buddhas, and propounds what the victors have taught.
The hero who dedicates like that surpasses all the bodhisattvas
In the world, as many as there are, caught up in apprehending things.
Without a guide a billion people born blind 
Cannot even find the road, so how could they ever 
Make it to the city? Without wisdom as a guide
These five blind perfections cannot touch awakening.
When wisdom has taken hold of them,
They gain eyes and get their names, 
Like when an artist has finished the work but not the eyes,
And they do not get paid until the eyes are painted in.
When wisdom dissects the compounded and uncompounded,
Good and bad dharmas, and does not apprehend even an atom,
Then the wisdom is counted in the world as perfect.
Like space, it does not stand anywhere at all.
Were bodhisattvas to think, “I will practice the wisdom of the victors 
And will free many billions of beings from the experience of suffering,” 
They would construct in thought the notion of beings. 
This is not the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
When learned bodhisattvas who have practiced before are practicing,
They practice this perfection without hesitation,
And as soon as they have heard it, perceive it as the Teacher
And quickly realize the peace of awakening.
Those with tiny intellects who, when practicing previously, 
Showed respect to a billion buddhas but did not place their trust 
In the perfection of wisdom, reject it when they hear it and,
Having abandoned it, are defenseless and go to the Avīci hell.
So put your trust in this mother of victors 
If you want to experience the finest buddha knowledge. 
Do not be like the trader who came back from a journey 
To an island of precious jewels without anything to sell.
Know that the purity of form is just the purity of the result.
The purity of the result and form is the purity of all-knowledge.
The purity of all-knowledge and the result, and the purity of form, 
Are equal to the space element, not divided and not cut apart.
Heroes go beyond the three realms but not into liberation
Because of the perfection of wisdom that they practice.
Though they have eliminated the afflictions, they reveal birth.
Though they do not get old, get sick, and die, they reveal death. 
Knowing that living beings are stuck in the mud of name and form, 
Wandering in the wheel of saṃsāra that is like a windmill, 
And confused like animals caught in a trap,
The wise move about like birds in the sky. 
When a perfectly pure practitioner does not practice form 
And does not practice consciousness, perception, feeling, or intention, 
Such a practitioner abandons all attachments 
And, freed from all attachments, practices the wisdom of the sugatas.
Bodhisattvas with clear intelligence who practice like that 
Cut attachments and go forth without attachment to the world, 
Like the sun that has escaped from an eclipse and shines brightly,
And like a fire set loose that burns grass, trees, and forests.
When bodhisattvas see with the perfection of wisdom 
That all dharmas are pure, perfectly pure in their basic nature,
They do not apprehend a doer, do not apprehend any dharma—
This is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
Śatakratu, king of the gods, asks the Victor:
How do bodhisattvas practicing wisdom make an effort?
They do not make even just a speck of effort at the aggregates and constituents.
Not making an effort at the aggregates is the bodhisattvas’ effort. 
If someone hears that dharmas are like magical creations, 
Like illusions, and makes an effort to train without hesitation, 
Know that they have served a billion buddhas well 
And have long since set out in the vehicle.
A person who has gone many yojanas on a wild jungle path
Might see cow herders and tended forest boundary-markers, 
And thinking that they are signs a village or town is near,
Will breathe out a sigh of relief and have no fear.
Similarly, when those set on awakening have gotten to listen
To this perfection of wisdom of the victors, 
They breathe out a sigh of relief and have no fear,
Not of the level of a worthy one and not of the level of a pratyekabuddha.
If those who go off to see the water in an ocean 
See trees, forests, and mountains, it is still a long way off, 
But if they do not see such signs, they become certain 
The great sea is near and have no doubt about it.
Similarly, those who have set out for awakening and are listening 
To the perfection of wisdom of the victors are like that,
And should know, “Even if I have not come face to face with the Leader 
And been prophesied, before long I will experience a buddha’s awakening.”
In brilliant springtime when buds have come out on the trees,
Leaves, flowers, and fruit will appear on the branches before long.
Whoever has taken this perfection of wisdom into their arms 
Before long will attain the awakening of the leaders. 
Just as when a woman is pregnant and suffers the pain 
Of contractions, it is said “the time is at hand for giving birth,”
Similarly, bodhisattvas who hear the victor’s wisdom and feel delight 
And a desire to act will quickly experience awakening.
When yogic practitioners practice the finest perfection of wisdom
They do not see an increase or a decline in form.
Someone who does not see a dharma, nondharma, or dharma-constituent,
And does not experience nirvāṇa, is standing in wisdom.
Those practicing this do not mentally construct the buddhadharmas, 
And do not mentally construct the powers, legs of miraculous power, awakening, or peace.
Practice imbued with the special power that is nonconceptual, 
Free from mental construction, this is the practice of the finest perfection of wisdom.
Subhūti asks the Buddha, the moon-like speaker:
What are the hindrances faced by those who delight in the good qualities?
And the Teacher says, There will be many hindrances,
So, for a start, I will proclaim just a few of them. 
When writing out this perfection of wisdom of the victors
Many different types of confidence giving a readiness to speak will arise 
That have not been of benefit to beings, and also that happen too fast, like lightning,
And disappear. This is the work of Māra.
While it is explained some will harbor doubts:
“The Leader has not even proclaimed my name here;
He has not proclaimed my social class, station, or lineage.”
They will not listen and reject it—the work of Māra.
Those without such an understanding who have heard 
The perfection of wisdom but go on looking for sūtras 
Are like fools who reject the roots and look for branches and leaves, 
Or like those who keep tracking an elephant after finding it.
Bodhisattvas seeking awakening at the level
Of a worthy one after obtaining this perfection 
Are like those who have obtained food with a hundred tastes—
Obtained the finest food—yet go looking for food of poor quality.
When they want respect, want wealth, 
Have ulterior motives to become intimate with householders,
Forsake what is right and engage in actions that are wrong,
Or have left the path and gone astray—this is the work of Māra.
At that time there are those who, out of longing and faith, 
Go to listen to the good Dharma, 
But come away feeling dislike and unhappiness
When they come to know the Dharma preacher’s preoccupations.
At that time these works of Māra occur.
At that time many other hindrances also occur
On account of which many monks become upset
And do not uphold this perfection of wisdom.
Just as jewels that have become priceless are rare 
And always come with many things that make trouble, 
So too the victors’ finest perfection of wisdom 
Is a precious Dharma that is rare and comes with many things that make trouble.
Māra is eager to block narrow-minded beings 
Newly set out in the vehicle from acquiring this rare jewel, 
But the buddhas in the ten directions 
Are there to assist them.
When a mother with many sons has fallen sick,
They are all worried and attend to her needs.
So too the buddhas in world systems in the ten directions 
Watch over this supreme wisdom that serves as their mother. 
World protectors in the past, in the ten directions now,
And those who will appear in the future arise from her—
The mother, the revealer of the world, who gives birth to the victors,
And reveals the thought activities of other beings. 
The suchness of the world, the suchness of a worthy one, 
The suchness of a pratyekabuddha, and the suchness of a victor’s child 
Are just a single suchness separated from existing things, without another.
A tathāgata knows the perfection of wisdom.
Whether the wise stand in the world or in nirvāṇa, 
This true nature, the fixed nature of dharmas—that dharmas are empty—remains. 
Bodhisattvas understand this suchness,
So those who have awakened are given the name realized one.
This pleasure park that is the perfection of wisdom, the resort
Of leaders with the ten powers, is the area over which they range. 
Even though they extricate beings from suffering in the
Three terrible forms of life they never entertain the idea of a being. 
Just as a lion having resorted to its mountain lair is fearless, 
And, roaring, frightens many lesser animals, 
So too the human lion resorts to the perfection of wisdom 
And, roaring in the world, frightens many tīrthikas.
Just as the light rays of the sun suspended in the sky 
Dry out this earth and reveal shapes,
So too the Dharma king, having resorted to the perfection of wisdom, 
Dries up the rivers of craving and reveals the Dharma. 
The Tathāgata says that where you do not see forms, 
Do not see feelings, do not see perceptions, 
Do not see intentions, and do not see consciousness, 
Mind, or thinking mind, you “see the Dharma.”
Beings say the words “see the space,” 
But how do you see a space? Consider what this means.
The Tathāgata’s exposition of seeing the Dharma is like that,
Because the seeing cannot be expressed with any analogy.
Those who see like that see all dharmas.
Like rulers sitting dispassionately having their minister do everything,
Whatever the work of the buddhas and the doctrines of śrāvakas,
The perfection of wisdom does it all.
A ruler does not travel to villages, does not travel the countryside,
But gathers in all that is amassed from the realm.
A bodhisattva does not stray from the true nature of dharmas 
But gathers in all the good qualities of the buddha level.
Those who have firm faith in the sugatas and bodhisattvas,
With an intention yoked to the finest perfection of wisdom, 
Go beyond both śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels 
And, unsurpassable, quickly reach the awakening of the victors.
To illustrate, when a boat on the ocean breaks up,
People who do not grab hold of a corpse, thatch, or a log 
Will perish in the middle of the water without reaching the shore.
But those who do grab hold get to the other side of the ocean.
Those with such faith who have gained a serene confidence
Do not do so having set aside the mother perfection of wisdom.
When the good qualities of skillful means are assisted by wisdom, 
They quickly experience the finest marvelous awakening of the sugatas.
You should know that it is like when somebody transports water 
In an unfired pot, which quickly disintegrates because it is flimsy. 
Carrying water in a fired pot, one does not worry that it will
Fall to pieces along the way—one arrives home happily.
Similarly, even if bodhisattvas have a lot of faith, 
If they are lacking in wisdom they will quickly become unfit,
But when their faith has been assisted by wisdom, they pass beyond
The two levels and gain the highest awakening. 
It is like when a ship that has not been well constructed 
Gets destroyed on the ocean together with its cargo and traders,
But if that ship has been well constructed, 
It does not break up and reaches the shore with its cargo. 
Similarly, even bodhisattvas who have cultivated faith will quickly 
Be lacking in what it takes for awakening if they have no wisdom. 
But if they are endowed with the finest perfection of wisdom, 
They will quickly, unharmed and uninjured, experience a victor’s awakening. 
Even if an ailing one hundred and twenty-year-old person
Gets up, they are unable to walk on their own.
But if they are supported by people on the left and the right, 
They have no fear of falling and move about easily. 
Similarly, even after they have set out, bodhisattvas 
Who are weak in wisdom degenerate in the interim.
But if they are assisted by skillful means and wisdom, 
They do not degenerate and touch a tathāgata’s awakening.
Those bodhisattvas standing on the level of someone beginning the work
Who have set out with a surpassing aspiration for a buddha’s finest awakening,
Who are good trainees with respect for their gurus,
Must continually rely on learned spiritual friends.
Why? The good qualities of the learned come from them. 
They give instruction in the perfection of wisdom.
The Victor, holder of all the finest qualities, says,
“The buddhadharmas are contingent on a spiritual friend.”
Dedicate giving, morality, patience, and similarly perseverance, 
Concentration, and wisdom to awakening. 
Do not settle down on awakening and the aggregates and grasp them as an absolute.
Those who are beginning the work have to be taught that.
Those practicing like that, oceans of good qualities, moon-like speakers, 
Are the world’s refuge, final allies, resting place, support, 
Intelligence, island, leaders, helpers, illuminators, 
Lamps, propounders of the finest doctrine, and imperturbable.
Greatly glorified, they wear the armor difficult to wear,
An armor not of aggregates, constituents, and sense fields.
They are free from and not grabbed by the notion of three vehicles; 
They are irreversible, unshaken, and have the quality of being imperturbable. 
You should know that those endowed with such dharmas, free from thought construction,
Free from doubt, hesitation, and uncertainty, purposeful, 
Not procrastinating after hearing the perfection of wisdom, 
Do not place their trust in others and are irreversible. 
This Dharma of the leaders is deep and hard to see. 
Nobody has realized it and nobody attains it. 
Therefore, the helpful and compassionate one, having reached awakening,
Is uninclined to teach, wondering, “Which group of beings will understand?” 
Beings like foundations and want objects. 
They keep on grasping like blind, uneducated fools.
The dharma to be acquired has no foundation and is free from grasping,
So it comes up as a topic for dispute with the world.
The space element in the eastern direction, southern direction, 
And, similarly, in the western direction and northern direction is without an end.
It is there above and below, in the ten directions as far as they go,
Without differences and without specific features. 
The suchness of what has gone and the suchness of what is yet to come,
The suchness of the present and the suchness of worthy ones,
The suchness of the totality of dharmas, the suchness of victors—
All this suchness of dharmas is without a distinguishing feature.
Bodhisattvas who want to reach this—
The awakening of the sugatas free from a differentiation of dharmas—
Should unite with the perfection of wisdom united with skillful means. 
There is no attainment without the wisdom of the leaders. 
When a bird with a large body of a hundred and fifty yojanas,
Feeble and with wings that give out and fail,
Launches itself from Trāyastriṃśa to Jambudvīpa, 
It gets utterly tired out there and drops. 
Even were the victors to have accomplished 
These five perfections for many billions of eons,
And to have always resorted to infinite vast prayers in the world,
Without method, separated from wisdom, they would have fallen to the state of a śrāvaka.
Those who want to go forth in the Buddha Vehicle
Should regard all beings equally, perceive them as father and mother,
And train in the thought to benefit and in a mind that is kind.
They should be without malice, straightforward, and gentle in speech.
The elder Subhūti petitioned the world protector:
Please teach the signs of the conflict-free
Oceans of good qualities, how those who are powerful are irreversible from awakening. 
Victor, please give us just an indication of such good qualities.
Free from the perception of difference, speaking appropriate words,
Not relying on others who lead a secluded religious life or brahmins,
The wise avoid the three terrible forms of life at all times
And work hard on the ten wholesome actions.
They instruct the world in the Dharma for no material benefit, 
Take singular delight in the Dharma, always speak gently,
Are fully mindful when going out, walking, sitting, and resting,
And look ahead just as much as a yoke-length when going, without thoughts veering off.
They are clean, wear immaculate clothes, are pure on account of three isolations,
Do not want wealth, are like dominant bulls always wanting the Dharma,
Are beyond the range of Māra, do not place trust in others, 
And are absorbed in the four concentrations but do not stand in those concentrations.
They do not want to be famous, their minds are not enveloped in anger,
And they become householders without attachment to all real bases,
Without seeking possessions by wrong livelihood
Through black magic spells or spells to procure women.
They do not foretell a boy or a girl to those who engage in sexual intercourse.
They have endeavored at the finest, very isolated perfection of wisdom;
Have steered clear of fights and quarrels; have steady loving minds;
Always want all-knowledge and have thoughts set on the Dharma;
Have avoided border areas, outer regions where barbarians are born;
Are not uncertain about their own level, always like Mount Sumeru;
Will forsake even their life for the sake of the Dharma; and have worked hard at yoga—
Know that these are the signs they are irreversible from awakening.
Form, feeling, perception, intention, and consciousness are deep.
In their basic nature they are without signs and are at peace.
Like trying to reach the bottom of the ocean with a reed,
When examined with wisdom, a bottom to the aggregates cannot be found.
What greater accomplishment of merit is there
Than that of bodhisattvas who have become deep like that,
Who realize the Dharma, the ultimate vehicle free from attachment 
In which there are no aggregates, no sense fields, and no constituents?
As many times in a single day as a man with a strong libido 
Actively imagines a woman in his mind 
After setting up a date but not getting her,
For that many eons the bodhisattva gets merit.
Bodhisattvas endowed with the perfection of wisdom 
Who give expression to the Dharma are better than those who give gifts
To worthy ones and pratyekabuddhas and guard morality for a thousand
One hundred million eons. Such giving and morality do not equal a fraction of that merit.
There is nothing in the three worlds that can match the virtue 
Of bodhisattvas who, having meditated on the finest perfection of wisdom,
Arise from it and give expression to the unsullied Dharma,
And dedicate it as the cause of awakening for the sake of the world.
Understanding, furthermore, that such merit 
Rings hollow, is empty, in vain, a fraud, and pointless, 
They thus practice the practice of the wisdom of the sugatas, 
And when practicing appropriate infinite merit.
They know that all these dharmas the buddha has explained, 
Advocated, and explicated are simply just talk.
Even if they are talked about for many billion eons,
In the dharma-constituent nothing diminishes and nothing increases.
Those dharmas of the victors called “perfections” 
Are proclaimed to be just words. Bodhisattvas who dedicate
Without falsely projecting them are not ruined 
And will experience a buddha’s finest awakening.
Just as the wick of an oil lamp is not burned up by its first encounter 
With a flame, yet not burned up without it either, 
And just as the wick is not burned up by its last encounter with a tongue of fire
Yet the wick is not burned up without the last tongue of fire either,
The finest awakening is not touched because of the first thought, 
Yet it cannot be touched without it either.
The peace of awakening is not gained through the last thought
Yet it cannot be gained without it either.
The seedling, flowers, and fruit come forth from the seed. 
If it has ceased, the tree does not exist since it does not. 
Similarly, the first thought is also the cause of awakening.
If it has ceased, awakening does not exist since it does not. 
Just as a pot is gradually filled up with drops of water,
The first to the last, with fewer and fewer,
So too the first thought is a cause of the finest awakening— 
Gradually buddhas become replete with good qualities.
Practicing empty, signless, and wishless dharmas
They do not touch nirvāṇa and are not involved with causal signs;
Like skilled boatmen they cross over and return again,
Not alighting at either shore, and not alighting in the ocean either.
Bodhisattvas practicing like that do not falsely project superiority, thinking, 
“I will be prophesied by those with the ten powers and will touch awakening.”
They are not scared of awakening because “there is nothing whatsoever here.”
Practicing like that they practice the wisdom of the sugatas.
Seeing the world as a wilderness with starvation and disease 
They are not scared, and from then they are clothed in armor; 
Always striving and wisely understanding until the final limit,
They do not entertain even a speck of despondency.
Bodhisattvas practicing the wisdom of the victors
Know that these aggregates are not produced and are empty from the beginning.
When not in equipoise their compassion for the mass of beings is set in motion,
And during that time they do not let the buddhadharmas decline.
It is just like a skillful person endowed with all the good qualities,
Strong, hard to beat, expert, skilled in vocational arts and rituals,
Gone as far as you can go in archery and many crafts, 
An accomplished magician wanting the welfare of the world,
Who, having brought together parents and spouse 
And taken them into a wilderness bristling with enemies, 
Magically conjures up many heroic and brave people, 
So that they journey and return home safely.
Similarly, at that time skillful bodhisattvas generate great compassion
For the entire mass of beings, and having passed beyond 
The four Māras and two levels, abide in the finest
Meditative stabilization and do not touch awakening.
Space supports the wind and it supports the bodies of water;
They support this great earth, and it supports the world.
The causal basis for a being’s experience of karma is like that.
Where is space located? Think about the meaning of this. 
Similarly, bodhisattvas abiding in emptiness,
Based on the prayer that is a vow to help beings in the world understand, 
Demonstrate many and varied kinds of work;
They do not touch nirvāṇa, and do not stand in emptiness.
When bodhisattvas with clear intelligence 
Practice the finest meditative stabilization of empty calm, 
During that time they do not meditate on causal signs;
They stand in signlessness, the calmest of calm.
A bird flying in the sky has not taken up a position.
It does not stand there yet does not fall to the ground.
So too bodhisattvas practicing the three gateways to liberation
Do not touch nirvāṇa yet do not practice with causal signs.
It is just like a person trained in archery who shoots an arrow into the sky,
And with a series of other arrows in succession 
Keeps the first arrow from falling to the ground—
If the person wished, the arrow would fall to the ground.
So too those practicing the finest perfection of wisdom—
Practicing intelligently with wisdom, skillful means, powers, 
And miraculous powers, they do not obtain that ultimate emptiness 
Unless and until the wholesome roots are complete.
It is just like a monk endowed with supreme magical power
Who stands in the sky with a double and performs miracles,
Making a show of standing, walking, lying down, and sitting,
Without getting sick of it and without finding it difficult.
So too smart bodhisattvas stand in emptiness
With perfected knowledge and magical power, without a dwelling place,
Making a show of infinite types of work for the worlds
Over a billion eons, without getting sick of it and without finding it difficult. 
It is just like somebody standing at the edge of a precipice, 
With both hands holding two wind-sails, who leaps into the sky 
To throw their body into the abyss,
Not falling for as long as they glide.
Similarly, the smart bodhisattvas stand in compassion,
Grasping the two wind-sails of skillful means and knowledge,
Considering dharmas as empty, signless, and wishless— 
Without touching nirvāṇa, they still see the dharmas.
It is just like those desiring jewels who go to a jewel island 
And, having discovered jewels, return home—
These traders do not live a happy life alone there, 
Ignoring the unhappiness of their relatives and friends. 
So too the bodhisattvas who have gone to the emptiness jewel island 
And obtained the concentrations, faculties, and powers—
They do not enjoy alone the experience of nirvāṇa,
Ignoring the sufferings of beings.
It is just like traders seeking business who, to gain familiarity, 
Go to the towns, markets, and villages along the way,
But do not stay in them and do not stay even on a jewel island.
Clever persons do not stay home but become expert at the path. 
Similarly, smart bodhisattvas are expert in all the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha 
Knowledges and liberations but do not stand in them, 
Do not stand in the knowledge of a buddha, do not stand 
In the uncompounded, and have a proper understanding of paths.
When, having forged a connection with the world out of love,
They practice empty, signless, and wishless meditative stabilization
It is impossible to designate them either as
Having reached nirvāṇa or as something compounded.
Just like the body of a person who has been magically conjured 
Is not invisible, you can designate it in words.
Similarly, with bodhisattvas practicing the gateways to liberation, 
You can designate them in words as well.
If, when asked about practice and faculties, 
Bodhisattvas do not teach the empty and signless dharmas, 
And do not explain the dharmas of the irreversible level,
You should know that they have not been prophesied to awakening.
If they do not long for the worthy one level, pratyekabuddha knowledge, 
Or anything in the three realms even in a dream, 
And if they see the buddhas, and teach the doctrine in the world,
You should know that they have been prophesied to be irreversible from awakening.
Those who, in a dream, see beings living in the three terrible forms of life
And immediately make a prayer that is a vow to cut the continuum of those terrible forms of life;
Who quell a conflagration by means of the controlling power of truth—
You should know that they have been prophesied to be irreversible from awakening.
When through the controlling power of truth, with goodwill and empathy, 
They cure the world of mortals of many demonic spirits and diseases, 
But without a false sense of superiority and without generating pride—
You should know that they have been prophesied to be irreversible from awakening.
If they accomplish all sorts of things through the controlling power of truth 
And get a false sense of superiority, thinking, “I have been prophesied”—
If the false prophecy by someone else makes those bodhisattvas feel superior— 
You should know that they are slightly intelligent with a false sense of superiority.
Māra approaches through the controlling power of a name
And says, “These are the names of your mother and father, 
These are the names of your ancestors going back seven generations,
And when you become a buddha this will be your name; 
The types of good qualities you had before are similar 
To the sorts of asceticism, restraint, and yogic practices you will have.”
The bodhisattvas who listen to this and have a false sense of pride—
You should know that they are slightly intelligent and being boosted by Māra.
Bodhisattvas doing a retreat in an isolated house, 
Village, mountain lair, jungle, or isolated forest, 
Who praise themselves and disparage others—
You should know that they are slightly intelligent and being boosted by Māra.
Those who live constantly in a house, in a city or market town,
But, apart from bringing beings to maturity and making an effort at awakening, 
Do not generate a longing for the worthy one or pratyekabuddha vehicles—
The children of the sugatas say that they are in isolation.
Were they, unaware of this isolation, to live for many hundreds 
Of millions of years in a mountain fastness 
Stretching five hundred yojanas, infested with snakes,
Still such bodhisattvas would be living a crowded life with unfounded conceit.
If they look down on bodhisattvas who endeavor for the welfare of the world, 
Who have gained the concentrations, powers, faculties, liberations, 
And meditative stabilizations, thinking, “They are not practicing in forest isolation,” 
The victors say that they are living within the range of Māra.
Whether they live at home or whether they live in the forest,
If free from thoughts of the two vehicles and destined for the supreme awakening,
They are in the isolation of those who have set out for the welfare of the world.
Bodhisattvas who think that they are greater than that one have demeaned themselves.
Therefore, scholars with a fierce aspiration seeking the best awakening 
Totally overcome a false sense of superiority;
Like relying on a doctor to cure a group of patients,
They must rely on a spiritual friend without becoming lazy.
Rely on spiritual friends—buddhas, and bodhisattvas who have set out 
For the supreme awakening who possess the perfections. 
They are the instructors; this is the ground of accomplishment. 
On account of these two causes there is a speedy realization of a buddha’s awakening.
For all the victors gone by, yet to come, and now standing
In the ten directions, the path is this perfection, nothing else is. 
This perfection is explained to be the illumination, the light, the torch, 
The finest teacher of those who have set out for supreme awakening.
Bodhisattvas understand that just as the perfection of wisdom 
Is marked as empty, all these dharmas are marked as empty too.
Understanding that dharmas are empty and without signs,
They thus practice the practice of the sugatas’ wisdom.
A being with false imagination wants food, 
And with a mind attached to saṃsāra always circles around. 
Both dharmas—“I” and “mine”—are unreal, are empty; 
Those that are foolish tie knots in space.
It is like those who worry that they have taken poison, 
And even though no poison was ingested, still collapse.
Similarly, fools assenting to “I” and “mine” 
Have the notion of “I” that is unreal. They are born and die continually.
I have explained that to the extent there is grasping, there is defilement,
And said that purification is not apprehending “I” and “mine.” 
Here, understanding that nothing will be defiled or purified, 
Bodhisattvas realize the perfection of wisdom.
Were all the beings, as many as there are in Jambudvīpa, 
To produce the thought of supreme awakening,
To give gifts for many hundreds of millions of millennia,
And dedicate it all as a cause for awakening for the sake of the world, 
Still, were someone to work hard at the finest perfection of wisdom 
And comply with it even for as little as a single day, 
The merit from the aggregate of giving would not be even a fraction of that.
So one should continually enter into wisdom without becoming lazy.
Yogins practicing the finest perfection of wisdom 
Generate great compassion yet have no perception of beings.
At that point they are smart and worthy of the offerings of the world. 
They make use of a city’s almsgiving that is never in vain.
Bodhisattvas who want to show the realm of beings the highway to the other side
In order to liberate gods, humans, and beings 
In the three terrible forms of life, linked there for so long, 
Should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom day and night.
Persons who previously lost their prized precious jewel
Are overjoyed when later it is found.
If as soon as they have found it, they lose it again through carelessness; 
They suffer continually from wanting the precious jewel they have lost. 
Thus, yogins who have set out for the finest awakening 
Should not part from the perfection of wisdom that is like a precious jewel,
As if taking up a precious jewel that is found, 
Diligently wrapping it, going quickly, and being at peace.
The sun’s lattice of light rays when the clouds have gone
Shines and destroys the blinding dense darkness in its entirety,
Surpassing the light of all animals, the light-making insects, 
And the light of all the hosts of stars and the moon. 
Similarly, bodhisattvas skilled at practicing the empty and signless 
Practice of the finest perfection of wisdom 
Destroy the darkness of views and surpass 
Śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, and many bodhisattvas.
It is just like the generous and socially responsible son of a king
Who is the most excellent of all and rightly sought out. 
He makes many beings happy even at that time,
Not to mention after gaining the resources when he has become king. 
So too bodhisattvas skilled at the practice of wisdom 
Are generous with the elixir of immortality, delighting humans and gods.
Even at that time they endeavor to benefit many beings,
Not to mention later when established as Dharma kings.
At that time the Māras feel a stab and are wracked by pain, 
Suffer, undergo mental anguish, and feel weak,
And in order to make these bodhisattvas lose confidence, to cause a frightful spectacle,
They set the directions on fire and let loose a shower of meteors.
But when those smart bodhisattvas with fierce aspirations
Day and night keep the finest perfection of wisdom in view,
Then their physical, mental, and verbalconduct is like a bird flying through space—
How could the friends of the dark find a way to hurt them?
When bodhisattvas fight, quarrel, 
Fall out, and harbor angry thoughts toward one another,
Māra then feels joy and an intense pleasure, 
Thinking, “Both are distant from a victor’s knowledge;
“Both are far removed and have become like flesh-eating fiends;
Both have broken their promise. How could there be 
Awakening for those who are angry and impatient?”
At that time the Māras and those on their side are pleased.
If bodhisattvas who have not been prophesied entertain angry thoughts 
About those who have been prophesied, and provoke them into an argument, 
They will have to buckle on the armor yet again
For as many eons as the instants of their hardhearted, faulty thinking.
Those who generate mindfulness, thinking, “Buddhas touch awakening 
Through the perfection of patience; these thoughts are not good”;
Who make a confession of each, restrain themselves in the future, 
And are not pleased, train here in the buddhadharmas.
Those who, when training, do not assert any training whatsoever, 
Do not apprehend someone training or dharmas to be trained in, 
And do not conceive of either training or not training—
Those who train like that train here in the buddhadharmas.
The bodhisattvas who understand that sort of training 
Will never be incompletely trained and never be immoral.
They train here in the dharmas to be pleasing to the buddhas;
Training with skill in the superior training, they do not apprehend anything.
Thus, they train in the wisdom of the learned light-makers
And do not think even a mere single thought that is not wholesome,
Just as when the sun moves through space
Its rays outshine the darkness before it. 
When training in the perfection of wisdom is being done, 
All the perfections are included in it;
Just as the sixty-two views are included in the view of the perishable collection,
So too these perfections are said to be included in it. 
It is just like when the life faculty shuts down,
And all the other sense faculties, as many as there are, shut down too. 
Similarly, when the finest of experts practice wisdom,
It is said that all the perfections are included there as well.
Smart bodhisattvas train in all the good qualities of śrāvakas, 
So too all the good qualities of pratyekabuddhas,
But they do not stand in them and do not long for them.
“I have to train in them,” they think, and train because of that.
It is possible to take the measure of a billion Sumerus by weighing it against 
A unit of weight, but not the goodness of that rejoicing—
The rejoicing, with an aspiration, in the production of the thought 
Of irreversible bodhisattvas who have set out for supreme awakening.
It becomes a rejoicing in the mass of merit of all beings 
Striving for the wholesome and wanting to be of benefit. 
So, they acquire the good qualities of the Victor
And make the gift of Dharma to the world to bring suffering to an end. 
Bodhisattvas free from conceptualization, comprehending 
That all dharmas are empty, signless, and cannot be elaborated on, 
Who do not strive for awakening with dualistic wisdom— 
Those yogins endeavor at the finest perfection of wisdom. 
There is no obstruction of the space element by a space;
Nobody can find such a thing.
So too the bodhisattvas skilled in the practice of wisdom 
Are like space, pursuing a course of action at peace.
It does not occur to a person conjured by magic, when among people, to think, 
“I have to make these people happy.” But still it does.
It is seen demonstrating various miraculous powers,
Though it has no body, has no mind, and does not even have a name. 
Similarly, it never occurs to those practicing wisdom to think, 
“Having realized awakening I will liberate the world.”
Though they demonstrate, like illusions, various births and many works,
They practice without conceptualization. 
It is just like a magically created buddha who does a buddha’s work, 
Without even a speck of vanity arising while it is being done.
Similarly, bodhisattvas skilled in the practice of wisdom
Demonstrate every action like a magically created illusion.
A skilled carpenter produces a contraption 
Like a woman or a man that also does all that has to be done.
So too with bodhisattvas skilled in the practice of wisdom— 
Free from conceptualization, knowledge does all the work.
The many assemblies of gods cup their palms together in a gesture of supplication
And bow down and prostrate to those with such a skillful practice, 
And the buddhas, as many as there are, in worlds 
In the ten directions, garland their good qualities with praise.
Even if beings in realms as numerous as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, 
All of them, were hypothetically to become Māras, 
And even if each of their pores were to magically create that many again, 
Still all those would be incapable of hindering the smart bodhisattvas.
There are four reasons why the four Māras cannot 
Overcome and sway smart and powerful bodhisattvas:
They stand in emptiness, do not forsake beings,
Are true to their word, and are imbued with the special power of the sugatas.
Know that the fine bodhisattvas who believe
In this perfection of wisdom, the mother of the tathāgatas, 
When it is being explained, and sincerely make an effort 
To accomplish it, have set out to be a knower of all.
The dharma-constituent does not come to stand in suchness,
Just like a cloud in the sky that stands without a place to stand,
Or a wandering sky-flying sorcerer who wants a place to stand 
And casts a spell that makes unexpected flowers and trees appear right there in space.
Bodhisattvas with clear intelligence practicing like that 
Do not apprehend an awakening or the buddhadharmas
And do not apprehend a teacher or someone who wants and sees the Dharma.
This is where those who seek peace and delight in good qualities stand.
Setting aside the arhat-liberation of a tathāgata, 
This standing place is the finest, the highest,
Among as many śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha standing places as there are
Conjoined with calm meditative stabilization, peace, and ease.
Just as a bird lives in the sky but does not fall to the ground,
And a fish lives in water but does not drown,
Bodhisattvas gone beyond through concentrations and powers 
Stand in emptiness but do not pass into complete nirvāṇa.
Those who want to go to the finest quality of all beings,
To touch the finest, most supremely marvelous buddha knowledge, 
And bestow the best, the finest, the most excellent gift of Dharma 
Should resort to this finest station of those who bring benefit.
Of all the trainings the guides elucidate,
This training is the finest, the highest training unrivaled by all. 
Someone smart who wants to go beyond all training, 
Should train in this training of a buddha, the perfection of wisdom.
This is the finest dharma lode, the most excellent dharma treasury,
The buddha lineage, the world’s storehouse of happiness and well-being.
The protectors of the past, still to come, and now in the worlds of the ten directions 
Are born from it, and yet this dharma-constituent is not exhausted.
As many trees, fruits, and blossoms—whole forests—as there are, 
They all come forth and appear from the earth, 
But still the earth is not exhausted, is not increased, is not diminished, 
Is without conceptualization, and does not feel oppressed.
Buddhas, śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, gods, 
And all the happiness and well-being dharmas, as many as there are, 
Originate from the finest of perfections, wisdom,
But the wisdoms are never exhausted and never increased.
The sugatas have said that the least, the middling, and the best of sentient beings, 
As many as there are, all originate from ignorance.
When the conditions are assembled, the suffering contrivance runs.
That ignorance contrivance is never exhausted and never increased.
Knowledge, ways, gateways, means, and roots, as many as there are,
All originate from the finest of perfections, wisdom.
When the conditions are assembled, the karma contrivance runs.
The perfection of wisdom is never exhausted and never increased.
Bodhisattvas who know this wisdom to be a dependent origination, 
Not produced and not exhausted, destroy the darkness of ignorance 
And obtain the self-originated state, like the sun when there are no clouds,
Emitting light rays and clearing away darkness.
Possessed of great might they abide in the four concentrations 
Without making them into a foundation or a standing place.
But still the four concentrations together with their branches 
Become the foundation for gaining the most excellent and finest awakening.
Those who gain the finest wisdom abide in the concentrations 
And also experience the four excellent formless meditative stabilizations. 
These concentrations are beneficial to the most excellent and finest awakening.
Bodhisattvas do not train in them to extinguish the outflows. 
This is a totally amazing, marvelous accumulation of good qualities. 
Having dwelled in the concentrations and meditative stabilizations,
There is no causal sign. Those dwelling there, if their bodies 
Are destroyed, are again born in the desire realm just as they intend. 
It is just like a human in Jambudvīpa who has not been 
To the finest city of the gods in the land of the gods before
But later on goes there and sees the places that are gained
And, having come back here, is not attached. 
Similarly, bodhisattvas who bear the finest qualities, endeavoring at 
Yogic practice, having dwelled in the concentrations and stabilizations,
Again later dwell in the desire realm without any attachment to it;
Like a water lotus, they do not stand in the dharmas of childish fools.
Great persons complete the perfections in order to 
Bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield, simply that.
They do not do it in order to be born in the formless realm, 
Lest the good qualities of awakening and the perfections decline.
It is just like persons who find a cache of precious stones
And do not feel any desire for them, but at a different time
Lay claim to them and, having claimed them, 
Return home but are not attached to them.
Similarly, smart bodhisattvas who have attained the four calm
Concentrations and meditative stabilizations that give joy and happiness,
Having forsaken the happiness of concentration, and the concentrations and meditative stabilizations they have attained, 
Again enter into the desire realm out of compassion for the world.
If bodhisattvas dwell in the meditative stabilizations and concentrations 
And feel desire for the worthy one and pratyekabuddha vehicles,
They have become uncollected, grossly excited, and mentally distracted.
The buddha qualities are ruined, like a ferryman whose boat has broken up. 
Furthermore, you should know that even though they manifest a zeal for
The five sorts of sense objects, for shapes, sounds, smells, tastes, and feelings,
Separated from the worthy one and pratyekabuddha vehicles, 
Enjoying the thought of awakening, they are brave and always in equipoise. 
Purified bodhisattvas work hard at practicing 
The perfection of perseverance because of other persons. 
Like a female slave carrying a water pot under the control of a master,
Heroes go about under the control of all beings. 
Whether criticized or continually struck, 
Scared when she thinks about it and overcome with fear,
Thinking, “I will get killed for it,”
The female slave does not tell her master to stop. 
Similarly, for the sake of awakening, those who have set out 
For the finest awakening should be servants, as it were, of the entire world.
From this they will reach awakening and complete the good qualities.
Fire starts from tinder and sticks and then burns them up.
Forsaking their own happiness, they work hard day and night 
At what other beings need without any expectations, 
Like a mother attending to her only son.
Be determined to keep at it without feeling it is hard.
When bodhisattva practitioners willing to spend a long time in saṃsāra 
Persevering at the welfare of beings and the purification of a buddhafield
Do not have even a speck of the feeling of being oppressed, 
They are endowed with the perfection of perseverance and are not lazy. 
If bodhisattvas who are not smart calculate one hundred million eons
And have the idea that it is a long time, they will painfully progress toward awakening.
They will suffer for a long time while trying to accomplish the Dharma.
They are deficient in the perfection of wisdom and are lazy. 
If they think in their minds that starting from the first production 
Of the thought up until reaching unsurpassed awakening 
Is just one day and night, they should be known 
As those with clear intelligence making a vigorous attempt.
If someone says, “After Mount Sumeru is destroyed 
You will reach supreme awakening,” and if that produces 
A feeling of oppression and they think about the size, 
Then those bodhisattvas have become lazy. 
If they produce the thought that Sumeru is pulverized to dust 
In just an instant, thinking, “It is only this size—what is the problem?”
They are smart bodhisattvas making a vigorous attempt.
Before long they will reach the finest awakening of the leaders. 
If with the thought, “I will bring beings to maturity and work for their welfare,”
They work hard with body, speech, and mind, 
Standing in the perception of self, they have become lazy. 
They are as far from all-knowledge as the sky from the earth.
When they have no notion of body, mind, or sentient being, 
When they have turned back from forming notions
And practice a nondual Dharma, the Beneficial One says that is the perfection of perseverance 
Of those who want the finest awakening, the peace that is never lost. 
If they hear someone rebuke or speak harshly to them, 
Smart bodhisattvas feel pleasure, thinking, “This is my happiness.”
Who speaks? Who hears? Who speaks to whom and why?
Those endowed with the finest perfection of patience are wise.
Should someone fill the billionfold world with precious stones and give them
To the knowers of worlds, buddhas, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas,
The merit from that aggregate of giving would not be even a fraction
Of that of the bodhisattvas endowed with the excellent dharma of patience. 
The bodies of those who remain patient become pure,
With thirty-two major marks and infinite strength.
They proclaim the best Dharma, emptiness, to beings.
Patient and wise, they are loved by the world. 
If a certain being takes up a container of sandalwood paste 
And with great respect rubs it on a bodhisattva, 
And another throws burning ashes over his entire head, 
He should regard both the same, with a dispassionate attitude.
When smart bodhisattvas who exercise such patience 
Dedicate that production of the thought to supreme awakening, 
They are heroes with forbearance for the whole world, surpassing the worthy ones, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and mass of beings, as many as there are.
Bodhisattvas exercising patience should produce this thought as well:
“Given that the hells, animal world, and world of Yama have much suffering, 
And I have been hurt through being powerless because of sense objects,
Why would I not put up with what I have up to now, for awakening?”
Thinking, “I will put up with as much suffering as there is in the world—
The whips, sticks, swords, murder, prison, and torture,
Decapitation, and the amputation of ears, arms, legs, and nose,”
Bodhisattvas stand in the perfection of patience.
Those longing for calm are ennobled by their morality. 
Standing within the range of the ten powers their morality is unflagging.
They carry out all the actions of restraint, as many as there are, 
For the benefit of all beings and dedicate it to awakening. 
Those longing to touch the worthy one and pratyekabuddha awakening 
Are immoral, not smart, and have a degenerate practice too. 
Those who dedicate to awakening, the finest peace,
Stand in the perfection of morality even if engaged with sense objects.
The Leader says the law from which the heroic ones’ awakened qualities come
Is the crux of the morality incumbent upon the righteous, 
And whatever law causes the awakening of the beneficial ones 
To degenerate is immorality.
Even if bodhisattvas enjoy the five sense objects, 
If, having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma, and noble Saṅgha, 
They are intent upon all-knowledge, thinking, “I have to awaken,”
 You should know that they are smart and stand in the perfection of morality. 
Even if they practice the ten wholesome actions for a hundred million eons, 
If they generate a longing for the state of a worthy one or pratyekabuddha,
Then their morality is faulty, their morality is degenerate. 
The production of that thought is heavier than even a pārājika defeat.
Bodhisattvas guarding morality, dedicating it 
To the finest awakening, not falsely projecting anything, 
Not smug, and avoiding the idea of a self and the idea of beings
Are said to stand in the perfection of morality.
Bodhisattvas practicing the path of the victors 
Are extremely immoral if they entertain various notions, 
Thinking, “These beings are moral, these immoral.”
They have a degenerate morality, not a morality that has been purified.
However could someone without the notion of self or the notion of beings, 
Free from notions and attachment, not be restrained? 
The Leader has said that someone who does not falsely project 
Being restrained and not being restrained is restrained by morality.
Purified beings endowed with such a morality 
Are unconcerned with all that is pleasant and unpleasant,
Uncowed when giving away their head and arms and legs, 
And always detached when giving away all that they own.
They understand that phenomena are in their basic nature selfless and a fraud, 
So, since even when they give away their own flesh 
Their minds are not cowed, what need is there to mention 
External things? It would be impossible for them to be stingy. 
Fools have the notion of self and are attached 
Because of grasping at things as “mine,” so how could they intend to give things away? 
Someone who is stingy is born in the abode of ghosts,
Or, if born human, will still be destitute.
And so bodhisattvas, knowing that beings are in poverty, 
Come to admire giving and always give away freely, 
Feeling joy from giving away the four beautifully decorated continents 
As though they were a gob of spit, but not so from gaining the continents.
Bodhisattvas with clear intelligence give a gift 
While focusing on the thought, “May this become a gift given to all beings,
As many as there are on the three planes of existence,”
Also dedicating it to the finest awakening for the sake of the world.
Without making it into a real thing on which to take a stand,
Never hoping for a result,
They are smart at giving like that and give away everything.
Having given away a trifle it becomes many and immeasurable.
Were as many beings as there are on the three planes of existence,
All of them without any left out, hypothetically to give gifts 
To knowers of worlds, buddhas, worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas 
For eons without end seeking the good qualities of a śrāvaka, 
And were someone with skillful means
To rejoice in their bases of meritorious action 
And dedicate it to the finest awakening for the sake of beings, 
That smart bodhisattva dedicating thus would surpass all the worlds. 
A single precious of stone of beryl surpasses 
Glittering stones, all of them, even a great pile,
And, similarly, a rejoicing bodhisattva surpasses 
All the vast heaps of gifts of all the worlds. 
If bodhisattvas giving a gift to the world do not make it 
Their own and do not value it as if property, 
Then the wholesome roots grow to have great might,
Like the cloudless shining circle of the waxing moon.
Through giving bodhisattvas cut off life as a ghost,
Cut off destitution and all the afflictive emotions,
While practicing gain an unending spread of things to use and enjoy,
And through giving cause suffering beings to mature.
By being moral they avoid the many forms of life in the animal world 
And the eight places that preclude a perfect human birth. 
They always find a perfect human birth. By being patient they obtain
A most excellent and broad body, golden in color, beloved, and attractive to the world. 
By persevering, bright good qualities do not decline, 
And infinite knowledge, the storehouse of the victor’s treasure, is gained.
On account of concentration they quit sense objects in disgust
And accomplish esoteric knowledge, clairvoyance, and meditative stabilization.
And with wisdom they comprehend the basic nature of all dharmas,
Pass perfectly beyond all three realms,
And, having turned the precious wheel, as the dominant bull among humans,
Teach the Dharma in the world to put an end to suffering. 
Those bodhisattvas, having brought these dharmas to completion, 
Look after a purified buddhafield and purified beings,
Look after the line of the Buddha and the line of the Dharma,
And similarly look after the Saṅgha and all dharmas as well.
The supreme doctor who cures the sickness of the world has given 
This instruction on wisdom and the awakening path titled
“The Collection of Jewel Qualities, the Awakening Path,” 
So that all beings will obtain this path.
This was the eighty-fourth chapter, “Collection,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.” 
Chapter 85: Sadāprarudita
Then the Lord, having spoken these verses,  said to venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, any son of a good family or daughter of a good family who wants to search for the perfection of wisdom, that son of a good family or daughter of a good family should search for the perfection of wisdom as it was sought for by the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, who is now practicing celibacy in the presence of the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Bhīṣma­garjita­nirghoṣa­svara.”
 The Lord having said that, venerable Subhūti asked him, “Lord, when the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita was searching for the perfection of wisdom, how did he search for it?” 
 Venerable Subhūti having asked that, the Lord said to him, “Subhūti, when the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita was searching for the perfection of wisdom, he searched in such a way that he did not take great care of his body, had no regard for his life, and was not motivated by gain, honor, or praise. While searching for the perfection of wisdom in a remote jungle hermitage, he heard a voice in the sky saying, ‘Son of a good family, go east and listen to the perfection of wisdom, go as you go when you do not pay attention to your body being tired, do not pay attention to feeling sleepy and drowsy, do not pay attention to food, do not pay attention to drink, do not pay attention to night and do not pay attention to day, and do not pay attention to the cold and do not pay attention to heat. Go without placing your hopes  in anything inside or outside. Son of a good family, go without looking to the right or left; go without looking to the west, the north, above, below, or into the intermediate directions. Son of a good family, go as you go when you do not move at all from the perishable collection, do not move at all from form, and do not move at all from feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness. Someone who moves from this will fail. In what will they fail? They will fail in the buddhadharmas, and those who fail in the buddhadharmas will live a cyclic existence, and those who live a cyclic existence will not gain the perfection of wisdom.’
 “The voice having said that, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita then replied to that voice, ‘I will do so. And why? Because I want to be a light to all beings; I want to fully accomplish all the buddhadharmas.’
 “The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita having said that, that voice said to him, ‘Excellent, excellent!’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita again heard a sound. He heard the sound say, ‘Son of a good family, since you have developed admiration for the emptiness, the signlessness, and the wishlessness dharmas, you must search for the perfection of wisdom. You must reject causal signs. You must reject real existence. You must reject the view that there is a being. Son of a good family, you must reject bad friends and must serve, attend on, and worship those spiritual friends who teach dharmas that are emptiness, the signlessness, and the wishlessness, not produced, not born, not really existent,  and not stopped. Son of a good family, when you are making progress like that it will not be long before you learn the perfection of wisdom that has been put into a book or that exists in the body of a monk who preaches the Dharma. Son of a good family, you should imagine whomever you learn this perfection of wisdom from to be the Teacher, and, son of a good family, you should feel appreciation and feel a sense of gratitude. You should weigh up these benefits: ‘Whomever I learn this perfection of wisdom from is my spiritual friend. By learning this perfection of wisdom I will quickly become irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, will stay close by the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas and be born in buddhafields where I will not be separated from the tathāgatas. I will avoid the places that preclude a perfect human birth, and I will obtain the perfect moment.’ Having understood these benefits, son of a good family, you should imagine the monk preaching the Dharma to be the Teacher. Son of a good family, you should not follow after the monk preaching the Dharma on account of a stream of thought connected with ordinary material possessions; rather, you should follow after the monk preaching the Dharma on account of seeking the Dharma from him and because of your respect for the Dharma. 
 “ ‘You should see through the works of Māra. Son of a good family, it can be that Māra the wicked one presents bodhisattva great beings with shapes, sounds, smells, tastes, and feelings to become engaged with, enjoyed, and used. Having risen above them, they become engaged with, enjoy, and make use of them with skillful means. You should not on that account let yourself feel a lack of faith in those monk bodhisattvas preaching the Dharma;  rather, you should think like this: “I do not know those skillful means, but they are well aware of skillful means. They are enjoying, keeping company with, and using these dharmas as a way to tame beings, because it is conducive to the growth of the wholesome roots of beings. Bodhisattvas are not attached to or obstructed by anything.” At that very moment, son of a good family, you should understand analytically the way things really are. And what, son of a good family, is the way things really are? It is this: all dharmas are without defilement and are without purification. And why? Because all dharmas are empty of an intrinsic nature. All dharmas are devoid of a being, devoid of a living being, devoid of a person, like an illusion, like a dream, like an echo, and like a mirage. Son of a good family, if you analyze the way all dharmas really are like that, and if you follow others because they are Dharma preachers, before long you will go forth into the perfection of wisdom. 
 “ ‘Furthermore, son of a good family, look out for the work of Māra. Do not feel displeased, son of a good family, if Dharma preachers look down on and do not watch over a son of a good family who wants the perfection of wisdom. Rather, keep on seeking for the Dharma, keep feeling a respect for the Dharma, and follow the monk preaching the Dharma without becoming despondent.’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, having received this instruction from the voice, went east, but before he had gone far it occurred to him that he had not asked the voice how far he should go, so he stopped right there, crying, grieving,  and lamenting: ‘I will spend the day on this very spot, spend two days, or three, or four, or five, or a week here. Until I hear the perfection of wisdom, I will not pay attention to my tired body, will not pay attention to drowsy and sleepy feelings, will not pay attention to food, will not pay attention to drink, will not pay attention to night and will not pay attention to day, and will not pay attention to the cold and will not pay attention to heat.’
 “Subhūti, it is just like somebody whose only son is near death—they feel great suffering and mental anguish, and with that pain they are extremely concerned for their son, concerned with nothing else except him. Similarly, Subhūti, the attention of the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita at that time was directed just to when he would hear the perfection of wisdom; he was concerned with nothing else except that.
 “Then, Subhūti, a shape assumed by a tathāgata stood in the presence of the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, who was suffering like that, and complimented him: ‘Excellent, son of a good family, what you say is excellent! When the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas of the past were practicing the bodhisattva practice, they sought for the perfection of wisdom just as you are now searching for the perfection of wisdom. Therefore, son of a good family, pursue it with this perseverance, this enthusiasm, and this yearning, and with a desire for it go east. Son of a good family, five hundred yojanas from here is a city called Gandhavatī surrounded by a series  of seven ramparts built of the seven precious stones, surrounded by a series of seven ditches and a series of seven rows of palm trees. It is twelve yojanas long and twelve yojanas wide, prosperous, thriving, secure, with an abundant food supply, with many living creatures, and full of people. It is laid out like a picture beautifully made with five hundred identical matching streets going through the city with ample space for palanquins, crisscrossed at intervals with bridges. The ramparts all around that metropolis are made of the seven precious stones. The copings on the ramparts are made of gold from the river Jambū, they rise up and are well worked, and on the top of all the copings grow trees made of the seven precious stones, laden with various fruits, also made of precious stones. All around, between each tree from one coping to the next, hangs a string that is also made of precious stones. A network of small golden bells is fastened on the strings and thus surrounds the entire city. When stirred by the wind, the network of small golden bells gives out a sweet, charming, and delightful sound. To illustrate, five-part music when played in harmony by skilled musicians gives out a sweet, charming, and delightful sound, and just like that those small bells give out a sweet, charming, and delightful sound when stirred by the wind. Those beings play, delight in, and take great pleasure in that sound. The ditches in the environs of the metropolis are full of water—water neither too cold nor too hot—and on the water there are beautiful boats that have come about from the maturation of earlier karma, variously decked out with the seven precious stones. Those beings go on board and play, delight, and sail around in them. The water is everywhere covered with blossoms of the blue lotus, the pink lotus, and the white lotus  and covered with other types of the most beautiful and fragrant flowers. Among all the types of flowers in a great billionfold world system there are none that are not there. There are five hundred parks in that metropolis all made of the seven precious stones, all of them colorful and beautiful. Each park has a large lotus lake with a circumference of about five hundred krośa, and growing from all the edges of the lotus lakes are colorful and beautiful blue lotus, pink lotus, and white lotus flowers of the seven precious stones. They cover the water. All those blue lotus, pink lotus, and white lotus flowers are the size of cart wheels and are blue, are the color blue, look blue, and appear blue; are yellow, are the color yellow, look yellow, and appear yellow; are red, are the color red, look red, and appear red; and are white, are the color white, look white, and appear white. On all those lotus lakes geese, cranes, kāraṇḍa ducks, and curlews are calling out. All the lotus lakes are unowned and unrestricted and have come about from the maturation of the earlier karma of beings, beings such as those who have practiced the perfection of wisdom for a long time and believed in the deep dharmas for a long time.
 “ ‘Son of a good family, at the main crossroads in the center of the city is the residence of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata made of the seven precious stones, colorful and beautiful, with a circumference of about a yojana, surrounded by seven ramparts and a series of seven rows of palm trees.  There are four gardens in the residence for the use of those living there, called Nityapramūdita, Aśoka, Śokavigata, and Puṣpacitra, and in each of the gardens there are eight lotus ponds called Bhadrā, Bhadrottamā, Nandā, Nandottamā, Kṣemā, Kśemottamā, Niyatā, and Avivāhā. One side of each lotus pond is made of gold, the second made of silver, the third made of beryl, and the fourth made of crystal. The ground at the bottom consists of quartz with golden sand over it. For each lotus pond there are eight flights of stairs adorned with steps made of different kinds of precious stones. In the spaces between the flights of stairs grow plantain trees of gold from the river Jambū. Covering the water of all the lotus ponds are pink lotus, blue lotus, and white lotus flowers, and on the lotus ponds geese, cranes, and curlews are calling out. All around those lotus ponds various flowering trees grow, and when those trees are stirred by the wind the blossoms drop onto the lotus ponds, so the water in all the lotus ponds has become imbued with the fragrance of sandalwood with its color and with its smell. 
 “ ‘The bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata along with his retinue, together with sixty-eight thousand women, endowed with an abundance of the five sorts of sense objects, play, delight, and take great pleasure there, and all those other male and female beings living in that city also enjoy those parks and lotus ponds, are endowed with an  abundance of the five sorts of sense objects, and play, delight in, and take great pleasure in them. 
 “ ‘Furthermore, even as the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata along with his retinue play, delight, and take great pleasure, he teaches them the perfection of wisdom during the three time periods. Those beings living in the city of Gandhavatī show their respect for the Dharma like this: They set up a throne for the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata at the main crossroads in the center of the city with one leg of gold, one leg of silver, one leg of beryl, and one leg of crystal with a cotton cloth spread over, with a soft pillow and a cushion on top covered with Vārāṇāsī cotton, and with a cloth canopy with interconnected pearl ornamentation about half a krośa above it in the sky. Over that ground and its surroundings, they strew the five different sorts of colored flowers and imbue the place with fragrance from different sorts of perfumes and incense. The bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata seats himself there and teaches the perfection of wisdom, and those beings showing such respect, son of a good family, listen to the perfection of wisdom from the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. From among those gods and humans, those many hundreds of beings, many thousands of beings, many hundreds of thousands of beings, some listen to it being read aloud, some take it up, some bear it in mind, some go over it again and again, some clearly articulate it, some recite it from memory, some write it out, and some pay proper attention and understand it. None of those beings is subject to making a blunder. They are all irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, go into the presence  of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata and you will learn the perfection of wisdom from him. Son of a good family, he has been your spiritual friend for a long time, the one who perfectly reveals and inspires you to take up unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, who fires you up and excites you about it. Son of a good family, I too earlier sought the perfection of wisdom just as you are now seeking it. Son of a good family, pay attention day and night and keep on going constantly, and before long you will hear the perfection of wisdom.’ 
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, having heard that, was pleased, delighted, enraptured, overjoyed, and filled with joy and mental happiness. 
 “It is just like when a person pierced by a poisoned dart is concerned with nothing else except the thought, ‘When will I find a doctor who will free me from this suffering and remove this dart?’ Similarly, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita was concerned with no other dharma except the thought, ‘When will I see that son of a good family who will let me hear the perfection of wisdom, and, having heard that Dharma, eliminate the attention I pay to falsely apprehended facts?’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, while remaining right on that very spot, generated the perception of the absence of a standing place in all dharmas, and many meditative stabilization gateways became evident to him—namely, the sarva­dharma­svabhāva­vyavalokana meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­svabhāvānupalabdhi meditative stabilization,  the sarva­dharmājñānāpagata meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­nirvikāra­darśin meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmāvabhāsa­kara meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­tamopagata meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmājñāna­vidhvaṃsana meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmānupalabdhi meditative stabilization, the kusumābhikīrṇa meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmātma­bhāvānabhinirhāra meditative stabilization, the māyāvivarjita meditative stabilization, the ādarśa­maṇḍala­pratibhāsa­nirhāra meditative stabilization, the sarva­sattva­ruta­nirhāra meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­nirnānātva meditative stabilization, the sarva­sattvābhipramodana meditative stabilization, the sarva­sattva­ruta­kauśalyānugata meditative stabilization, the nānāruta­pada­vyañjanābhinirhāra meditative stabilization, the astambhita meditative stabilization, the prakṛtyavalokita meditative stabilization, the anāvaraṇa­vimokṣa­prāpta meditative stabilization, the rajopagata meditative stabilization, the nāma­nirukti­pada­vyañjana meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­vipaśyana meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmānāvaraṇa­koṭi meditative stabilization, the gaganakalpa meditative stabilization, the vajropama meditative stabilization, the āsanna­rūpa­rājas meditative stabilization, the jayalabdha meditative stabilization, the avivartya­cakṣus meditative stabilization, the dharma­dhātu­nirgata meditative stabilization, the āśvāsadātā meditative stabilization, the siṃhābhigarjita meditative stabilization, the sarva­sattvābhibhavana meditative stabilization, the vigatarajas meditative stabilization, the asaṃkliṣṭa meditative stabilization, the padmavyūha meditative stabilization, the kāṅkṣocchedana meditative stabilization, the sarva­sārānugata meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmābhyudgata meditative stabilization, the abhijñā­bala­vaiśāradya­prāpta meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­nirvedhaka meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­vibhava­samudra meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­nirviśeṣa­darśin meditative stabilization, the sarva­dṛṣṭi­kṛta­gahana­vivarjita meditative stabilization, the tamopagata meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­nimittāpagata meditative stabilization, the sarva­saṅga­vimukta meditative stabilization, the sarva­kausīdyāpagata meditative stabilization, the gambhīra­dharma­prabhā­kara meditative stabilization, the merukalpa meditative stabilization, the asaṃhārya meditative stabilization, the māra­maṇḍala­vidhvaṃsana­kara meditative stabilization, the trailokyānabhiviniṣṭa meditative stabilization, the raśminirhāra meditative stabilization, and the tathāgata­darśana meditative stabilization became evident to him. 
 “While remaining in those meditative stabilizations, he beheld countless, infinite lord buddhas in world systems  in the ten directions, who were illuminating this perfection of wisdom for the bodhisattva great beings. Those tathāgatas, having complimented him with ‘excellent’ and assured him, said, ‘Son of a good family, earlier when we were undertaking the bodhisattva’s practice we sought for the perfection of wisdom like this, and when we were seeking we also attained these meditative stabilizations; having attained these meditative stabilizations we became advanced in our comprehension of the perfection of wisdom and became grounded in the irreversible buddhadharmas. As we looked at the intrinsic nature and basic nature of these meditative stabilizations, we did not see any phenomenon at all that becomes absorbed, that arises from absorption, that practices for awakening, or that would fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Son of a good family, this is that perfection of wisdom. Son of a good family, having stood without falsely projecting superiority or not falsely projecting superiority on account of any phenomenon we have gained such a body as this with a color like gold and obtained the thirty-two major marks, eighty minor signs, a halo extending the length of our outstretched arms, the inconceivable knowledge of a buddha and unsurpassed wisdom of a buddha, the unsurpassed meditative stabilization of a buddha, and the perfection of all the good qualities of a buddha—a perfection of good qualities that even tathāgatas cannot take the measure of or see the end of, never mind śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. Therefore, son of a good family, produce a great feeling of respect for just these dharmas, intensely seeking for and wanting to obtain them.  Son of a good family, when you seek for and want to obtain unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, it is not hard to gain. Produce an intense feeling of respect for your spiritual friends and cherish them. Bodhisattva great beings who are looked after by spiritual friends will quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita asked those tathāgatas, ‘Who is my spiritual friend?’ 
 “They said to him, ‘Son of a good family, for a long time you have been matured for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and assisted by the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, who has trained you in the perfection of wisdom and skillful means. Son of a good family, he is the spiritual friend assisting you, so bear in mind as an order what he says to you. Son of a good family, if you should wrap the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata like a turban on your head for an eon, or two eons, or a hundred eons, or a thousand eons, or even more eons than that, and attend to his needs with all the prerequisites for happiness, offer him all the shapes, sounds, smells, tastes, and feelings in a great billionfold world system, as many as there are, son of a good family, you still would not have paid him back for what he has done for you. And why? Because, son of a good family, through his power you have gained such meditative stabilizations as these, have heard about the perfection of wisdom and skillful means, and have obtained the perfection of wisdom.’ 
 “Then those tathāgatas, having assured the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, disappeared. That son of a good family emerged from those meditative stabilizations, and having emerged it still occurred to him to wonder, ‘Where did those tathāgatas come from and where did they go?’ Unable to see those tathāgatas, he became distressed and unhappy. It also occurred to him to think, ‘That bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata has obtained the dhāraṇīs, has the five clairvoyances, has served well the victors of the past, and as my spiritual friend has looked after me. He has worked for my welfare for a long time, so I am going to go into the presence of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata and, when I get there I will ask about this matter, about where those tathāgatas came from and where they went.’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita constantly cultivated an attitude of liking, serene confidence, reverence, and respect for the bodhisattva great being Dharmdogata, and having constantly cultivated that attitude, he began to worry: ‘I am destitute, so what can I take to show my respect when I go into the presence of the bodhisattva great being Dharmdogata? I do not have anything like a robe, or jewel, or gold, or precious stone, or pearl, or beryl, or conch shell, or crystal, or coral, or silver, or fine sand particles of gold, or flowers, or a perfumed flower garland, or a cream, or a parasol. Were I  to go into the presence of the bodhisattva great being Dharmdogata like this it would be wrong of me. I feel no joy or delight.’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, endowed with such qualities and with such a respectful attitude toward the guru, set off and gradually reached another city. When he went into the middle of the marketplace, it occurred to him to think, ‘I should sell myself and with the profit get something to show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. For a long time, thousands of my bodies have been destroyed, come to an end, and been sold, and over immeasurable cyclic existences I have experienced immeasurable suffering in hell again and again because of the desire for sense gratification caused by sense objects, but not because of such a Dharma as this or in order to have something to show respect to such a great being as this.’
 “The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita then stood in the marketplace and advertised himself, shouting, ‘Who wants a man? Who wants a man?’
 “Then it occurred to Māra the wicked one to think, ‘This bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, having sold himself out of a desire for the Dharma, will then show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata and in regard to the perfection of wisdom and skillful means will inquire, “How should a bodhisattva great being practice the perfection of wisdom and quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, receive a veritable ocean of sacred learning, not be overpowered by Māra and the Māra class of gods, and obtain the perfection of all good qualities?” There he will work for the welfare of many beings and, having fully awakened  to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, will cause them to pass beyond my sphere of influence and will cause other beings as well to pass beyond my sphere of influence. I have to block him in this.’
 “Somehow or other Māra the wicked one cast a spell over the brahmins and landowners so that they could not hear the shout of the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita calling out, ‘Who wants a man? Who wants to purchase me?’ 
 “Then, when the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita found there was nobody to purchase him, he stood off to the side and wept, lamenting, ‘When I thought to sell myself to find something to show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, I could not even find somebody to purchase me. What I found is something terrible to find.’ 
 “Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods, to think, ‘Does the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita have such a perfect surpassing aspiration—namely, to give up his body out of a desire for the Dharma—or not? I will put this bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita through a trial.’
Having magically produced himself disguised in the form of a brahmin student, he went specifically to where the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita was, and having gone there he asked the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘Son of a good family, what is the problem such that you are so miserable, distraught, and weeping like this?’
 “ ‘Brahmin student,’ he replied, ‘I wanted to sell myself out of a desire for the Dharma, in order to worship the Dharma, but I found nobody to purchase me. This made me think, “Oh, I really have very little merit,  because when I had the idea to sell myself to worship the perfection of wisdom and to show respect to the noble bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, I still could not even find somebody to purchase me.” ’
 “Then that brahmin student said to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘I do not want a man, but I am making a sacrifice, and for that I need a human heart, blood, bone, and marrow. Make a deal with me for that.’
 “The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita thought, ‘I have found something excellent to find, and good to find in that I have found this brahmin student who will purchase my heart, blood, bone, and marrow, and the final outcome of my body will be in the perfection of wisdom and skillful means.’ He was thrilled, cheered up, and overjoyed, and he said to the brahmin student, ‘Brahmin student, you can take what you want from this body of mine.’
 “ ‘Son of a good family,’ he replied, ‘I will give you whatever payment you want.’
 “He said to him, ‘Brahmin student, give me whatever you will part with.’ 
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita took a sharp sword, stabbed his right arm and made the blood flow out, stabbed his right thigh and stripped all the flesh off, and went up to a wall to smash the bone to get the marrow. 
 “Then a merchant’s daughter sitting on the top floor of her house saw that bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita strip all the flesh off his thigh and go up to the wall to smash the bone and thought, ‘Why is this son of a good family  hurting himself like this? I am going to go up to that son of a good family and ask him.’
 “That merchant’s daughter went right to where the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita was and, having gone, asked the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘Son of a good family, why are you hurting yourself like this? What are you going to do with this blood, bone, and marrow?’ ”
 “Sadāprarudita said to the merchant’s daughter, ‘Having sold it to this brahmin student, I will worship the perfection of wisdom and will also show respect to the noble bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata.’
 “Then that merchant’s daughter asked the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘Son of a good family, having sold your heart, blood, bone, and marrow like this, son of a good family, what kind of good quality will you, who want to show respect to him, accomplish?’
 “ ‘Young lady,’ he replied to her, ‘that son of a good family will instruct me in the perfection of wisdom and skillful means in which I have to train, and when I have trained in them, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, I will become a support for all beings. I will also obtain a body gold-like in color, and I will also obtain the thirty-two major marks of a great person, a halo extending the length of two outstretched arms, endless light rays, great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity, the four fearlessnesses, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, and the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.  I will complete the five clairvoyances; inconceivably pure morality, inconceivably pure meditative stabilization, and inconceivably pure wisdom; the ten tathāgata powers; and perfect, complete knowledge, and I will obtain the unsurpassed Dharma jewel that is to be apportioned out among all beings.’ 
 “That merchant’s daughter then said to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘Son of a good family, it is totally amazing, these dharmas you have proclaimed that are so vast. You have to give your body away for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River for the sake of each of such dharmas as these, never mind for one. Son of a good family, I will give you whatever gold, or jewel, or pearl, or beryl, or silver, or flowers, or incense, or perfume, or fragrance, or flower garland, or cream, or powder, or robe, or parasol you need to show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, but do not hurt yourself like this. I will also accompany you. I will go right to where the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata is, and together with you I too will cause such wholesome roots to grow—namely, those for obtaining such dharmas as those.’
 “Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, having thrown off his brahmin student disguise, stood in front of bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita in his own body and said,  ‘Excellent, son of a good family; excellent that you have such a firm commitment! Earlier, when out of a desire for such dharmas, previous tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas were undertaking the practice of a bodhisattva, they completed the perfection of wisdom and skillful means and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Son of a good family, I have no use for a heart, blood, bone, and marrow. I came here to test you. Son of a good family, pick whatever favor you want. Whatever the favor, son of a good family, I will grant it to you.’
 “He said to him, ‘Śatakratu, please give me the unsurpassed buddhadharmas.’
 “Śatakratu replied, ‘Son of a good family, this is a specific object that does not lie within my range. This is an object that lies specifically within the range of the lord buddhas. Pick some other favor.’
 “The bodhisattva Sadāprarudita said, ‘Head of the gods, do not concern yourself with my body being in this state that needs to be made whole. Head of the gods, I myself will unleash the controlling power of truth. Head of the gods, if it is true that the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have prophesied that I am irreversible from full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and if I am known from my immovable surpassing aspiration, then through that truth and through the truth of those words, let my body become as it was before.’ Having said that, through the power of the Buddha and the purity of the surpassing aspiration, at that very moment, in that second, in the time it takes to blink, the body of the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita was reconstituted as it was before.  Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, lost his confidence giving a readiness to speak and, unable to muster up the confidence to say anything in reply to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, simply vanished on the spot.
 “Then that merchant’s daughter said to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘Son of a good family, come here. Come right to where my home is. I will get my parents to donate some jewels so you can worship the perfection of wisdom and show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata with them.’
 “The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, accompanied by that merchant’s daughter, then went right to her home. Having arrived at her home that merchant’s daughter then said to her parents, ‘Mother, father, please give me a lot of gold, and silver, and jewels, and precious stones, and flowers, and incense, and perfume, and flower garlands, and creams, and powders, and robes, and a parasol, and a royal ensign, and a banner, and what is needed for making music. Please release the five hundred servant girls you have given me. We will accompany the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita and go to worship the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. He will also teach us the Dharma.’
 “Then that young lady’s parents asked her, ‘Daughter, who is this bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita? Daughter, where is this son of a good family now?’
 “The young lady said, ‘That son of a good family has right now arrived at our front gateway. That son of a good family with the unsurpassed aspiration—namely, the desire to set all beings free  from the infinite sufferings of saṃsāra—has set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Out of a desire for the Dharma he was selling himself, wanting to worship the perfection of wisdom and wanting to get something to show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. Unable to get anybody to purchase his body, he was suffering, unhappy, and miserable and said, “When I wanted to sell myself, I could not find somebody to purchase me.” Then Śatakratu, having transformed himself into the form of a brahmin student, asked him, “Son of a good family, what do you want to sell yourself for?” and Sadāprarudita said, “Through this I will get something to worship the perfection of wisdom and show respect to that noble bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata as well; my buddhadharmas are contingent on that, which is to say, out of a desire for the Dharma.” Then Śatakratu, in the form of a brahmin student, said, “I do not need you. But I am making a sacrifice, and for that I need a human heart, blood, bone, and marrow.” That son of a good family, without despairing, said to him, “I will give it,” took a sharp sword, stabbed his arm and made himself bleed, stripped the flesh off his thigh, and, going off to smash the bone, stood off to one side thinking, “I will donate the bone and marrow.” I had gone up to the top floor of the house, so I saw him bleeding there and I wondered about that, “Why is this man hurting himself like this?” So I went up to him and spoke to him. I asked, “Son of a good family, why are you yourself making your body bleed like this? What are you doing this for?”  He said to me, “I am giving my blood, heart, bone, and marrow to this brahmin student. Why? Because I am destitute. I have no other wealth at all.” I asked, “What are you going to use your wealth for?” and he said to me, “It is for this, namely, to worship the perfection of wisdom and to get something to show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata out of a desire for the Dharma.” I asked him, “Son of a good family, what kind, or what special good quality will you get from that?” and he said to me, “On account of this he will reveal to me the inconceivable good qualities of a buddha and infinite dharmas of a buddha. I will get dharmas such as those from this.” Having heard about those inconceivable good qualities of a buddha, I too felt joy and immense delight and thought, “It is totally amazing that this son of a good family would have such enthusiasm for such a condition as this and be so overjoyed. If this son of a good family, out of a desire for the Dharma, is giving even himself away, why would we, who have vast possessions, not worship the Dharma? Why would we not make prayers for such states as those?” Then I said to that son of a good family, “Son of a good family, do not hurt yourself like this. I will give you a lot of the wealth you need to show respect to the noble bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. I will also accompany you and will go right to where the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata is, and I too will worship that son of a good family. I too will obtain what you have proclaimed, namely, these unsurpassed buddhadharmas.”  So, father and mother, please give me a great pile of treasure, and I together with that son of a good family will worship the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata.’ 
“Then that daughter’s parents said to their daughter, ‘From what you have told us about those excruciating conditions of that son of a good family, those dharmas are definitely inconceivable, superior in all the world, and bring about happiness for all beings. And that son of a good family is eager for such an excruciating condition for the sake of them, so we grant you our permission. But we too, daughter, together with you will go to see the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, and we also will worship him. Arrange for us the opportunity to go as well.’
 “That young lady then prepared to leave in order to worship and serve the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata and said to her parents, ‘I am not going to stand in the way of anyone on the side of good.’
 “Then that merchant’s daughter decked out five hundred carriages with ornaments, decked out those five hundred girls with ornaments, and, having decked them out, while holding flowers of various colors; holding incense, and perfume, and flower garlands, and creams, and powders, and robes, and a parasol, and a royal ensign, and a banner; holding aloft gold and silver flowers; holding an assortment of various jewels, and bringing along hard food, soft food, and tasty food to eat in a copious abundance, got into one carriage together with the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita  while the five hundred girls got into their five hundred carriages surrounding them, and with a huge retinue, starting with her mother and father in front, they set off traveling specifically to the east. 
 “After they had gone along stage by stage, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita saw from afar the city of Gandhavatī with the colors of the seven precious stones, built beautiful to behold, surrounded by a series of seven ramparts of the seven precious stones, with seven archways, surrounded by a series of seven moats and a series of seven rows of palm trees, twelve yojanas long and twelve yojanas wide, prosperous, thriving, secure, with an abundant food supply, full of many people and living creatures, laid out like a picture beautifully made with five hundred identical matching streets going through the city with ample space for palanquins, and crisscrossed at intervals with bridges excellently built. He saw seated on a Dharma throne at the crossroads at its center the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, at the head of and surrounded by a retinue of many hundreds, many thousands, many hundreds of thousands, explaining the Dharma. The moment he saw him he obtained a joy and happiness just like that of a monk when he is absorbed in the first concentration with single-pointed attention, and seeing him he thought, ‘It would not be becoming of me to go into the presence of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata while seated in a carriage,’ so he got down from his carriage, and the merchant’s daughter and the five hundred girls got down from their carriages together with him too. Then, with the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita surrounded by the merchant’s daughter and the five hundred girls and so on in front,  all proceeded specifically toward the infinite array and the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. 
 “The bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata had had an upper chamber on the roof constructed for the perfection of wisdom, made out of the seven precious stones, ornamented with red sandalwood, and draped in a net of pearls, and at that time, in order to worship the perfection of wisdom, seven jewels had been placed at the four corners of the upper chamber on the roof doing the work of lamps, and four censers made of silver were hanging down at the four sides in which pure black agaru was smoldering. In the center of the upper chamber four thrones made of the seven precious stones had been set down, four jeweled chests had been placed on them, and a golden book of the Perfection of Wisdom written in melted beryl had been put in those. That upper chamber on the roof was also adorned with variously colored hanging tassels. 
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita and the merchant’s daughter together with the five hundred girls saw that upper chamber on the roof adorned with the infinite array, and saw many thousands of gods, and also saw Śatakratu, head of the gods, showering down on, showering over, and showering right over that upper chamber on the roof divine mandārava flowers, divine sandalwood powder, divine gold dust, and divine silver dust. They also heard divine instrumental music. 
 “Having seen and heard that, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita asked Śatakratu, head of the gods, ‘Head of the gods, why are you and many thousands of gods showering down on, showering over, and showering right over  that jeweled upper chamber on the roof mandārava flowers and sandalwood powder, and why are the gods playing this divine instrumental music up in the sky?’
 “The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita having asked that, Śatakratu, head of the gods, said to him, ‘Son of a good family, are you not aware that this is the perfection of wisdom, the mother and guide of the bodhisattva great beings, and by training in it bodhisattva great beings will quickly gain the perfection of all good qualities, all the buddhadharmas, and all-knowledge as well?’
 “Śatakratu, head of the gods, having said that, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita asked him, ‘Kauśika, where is the perfection of wisdom, the mother and guide of the bodhisattva great beings?’
 “ ‘It is in this upper chamber on the roof,’ replied Śatakratu. ‘The noble bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata has placed it there, having written it in melted beryl in a golden book and sealed it with seven seals. It is difficult for us to show it to you.’ 
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, with the merchant’s daughter and together with the five hundred girls, came forward as a group bearing flowers and bunches of flower garlands, and jeweled robes, and incense, and perfume, and flower garlands, and creams, and powders, and robes, and a parasol, and a royal ensign, and a banner, and gold and silver flowers, as much as they had, and they worshiped the perfection of wisdom with them. Each of them, too, had set aside  a portion from that for showing respect to the noble bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata.
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, having earlier worshiped the perfection of wisdom with flowers, and incense, and perfume, and flower garlands, and creams, and powders, and clothes, and a royal ensign, and a banner and so on, went right to where the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata was, and, having gone there, in order just to worship the Dharma, strewed near, strewed in front, and strewed all around the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata flowers, and incense, and perfume, and flower garlands, and creams, and powders, and robes, and a parasol, and a royal ensign, and a banner, and sandalwood powder, and gold and silver flowers. 
 “Those flowers then became a second story of flowers above the head of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata; the gold and silver flowers remained like a palace in the sky; and those robes and jeweled robes remained like a choice circle of clouds made of various precious stones. Beholding such a miracle of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata’s miraculous power, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, the merchant’s daughter, and the five hundred girls thought, ‘This is amazing! Even while this bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, this son of a good family, is pursuing the career of a bodhisattva, he has such great miraculous power, is so very mighty, and has such great energy. What, then, is it going to be like when he has fully awakened to unsurpassed,  perfect, complete awakening?’ 
 “Then, starting with that merchant’s daughter, those five hundred girls generated a tremendous feeling of delight in the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. They all produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and said, ‘In the future may we, from this wholesome root, become tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas. May we, even while pursuing the career of a bodhisattva, obtain those dharmas that are just like these dharmas that the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata has obtained, and even while pursuing the career of a bodhisattva, may we actualize such dharmas as those. May we come to show respect to the perfection of wisdom just as the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata shows respect to the perfection of wisdom; and just as the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata teaches it to many people, may we teach it too. Just as this bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata is endowed with and perfected in the perfection of wisdom and skillful means, may we too come to be endowed with and perfected in the perfection of wisdom and skillful means.’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita and those five hundred girls starting with the merchant’s daughter, having worshiped the perfection of wisdom and also showed respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, bowed their heads to the feet of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata and, treating him with respect,  stood to one side with palms cupped together in a gesture of supplication. 
 “While standing to one side, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita said to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, ‘Son of a good family, here, while searching for the perfection of wisdom, I went to a remote jungle hermitage and heard a voice saying, “Son of a good family, go east and listen to the perfection of wisdom!” Having heard that voice, I went specifically to the east, but it occurred to me that I had not asked the voice how far I should go and who I would find to hear the perfection of wisdom from, so I felt very unhappy and distraught. I spent seven days and nights right on that very spot. Because I was so distraught, I did not have the customary thoughts about eating; rather, I focused my attention on just the perfection of wisdom. While thinking, “I did not ask the voice how far I should go and who I would find to hear the perfection of wisdom from,” a shape assumed by a tathāgata appeared in my presence and it said, “Son of a good family, go five hundred yojanas from here, and in a city called Gandhavatī you will see the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata teaching the perfection of wisdom.” 
 “ ‘Having heard that from that shape assumed by a tathāgata, I set out and went on, as I had been told, specifically to the east, and I saw from afar a noble Dharma preacher, and the moment I saw him I felt a happiness just like that of a monk who has entered into the first concentration.  Suffused by that joy and delight, I did not move from that spot, and I heard the perfection of wisdom from you. As I listened to it, many meditative stabilization gateways arose, and as I stood in them, the lord buddhas in world systems in the ten directions assured me and said, “Excellent, excellent, son of a good family, these meditative stabilizations of yours have arisen from the perfection of wisdom. We too, having stood in them, completed the buddhadharmas.” Thus, those tathāgatas taught me excellently, inspired me, fired me up, and excited me. Then they disappeared, and, having emerged from those meditative stabilizations, it occurred to me to wonder, “Where did those tathāgatas come from and where have they gone?” Then I again thought, “The bodhisattva great being noble Dharmodgata has done the work under the victors of the past, planted wholesome roots, and is well trained in the perfection of wisdom and skillful means. He will reveal to me where those tathāgatas came from and where those tathāgatas have gone.” So, son of a good family, I am asking you where those tathāgatas came from and where those tathāgatas have gone. Please teach me about the coming and going of those tathāgatas so we will be knowledgeable about the coming and going of those tathāgatas and will not become separated from seeing the tathāgatas.’ ”
This was the eighty-fifth chapter, “Sadāprarudita,”  of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 86: Dharmodgata
“Having said this, the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata said to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘Son of a good family, tathāgatas have not come from anywhere and have not gone anywhere. They do not move from suchness. The Tathāgata is suchness. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, there is no coming or going in what is not produced. The Tathāgata is not produced. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, there is no coming or going in the very limit of reality. The Tathāgata is the very limit of reality. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, there is no coming or going in emptiness. The Tathāgata is emptiness. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, there is no coming or going in things as they really are. The Tathāgata is things as they really are. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, there is no coming or going in what is separated from greed. The Tathāgata is separated from greed. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, there is no coming or going in a cessation. The Tathāgata is a cessation. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, there is no coming or going in the element of space. The Tathāgata is the element of space.
 “ ‘Son of a good family, the Tathāgata is not other than those dharmas. Son of a good family, the suchness of those dharmas and the suchness of the Tathāgata is a single suchness. Suchness, son of a good family, cannot be divided. Son of a good family, the one suchness is beyond being counted as two or three because of this—namely, it is not a state of being. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, it is just like this: a man oppressed by the sun at midday in the middle of the last month of the hot season might see a shimmering mirage and run after it, thinking, “I will drink some water from it.” What do you think, son of a good family, has that water come from somewhere and gone somewhere? Has it gone anywhere, to the ocean in the eastern direction, or the ocean in the southern direction, or the ocean in the western direction, or the ocean in the northern direction?’
 “Sadāprarudita said, ‘Son of a good family, given that a mirage has no water, how could it come or go? Son of a good family, a man with a naturally childish disposition, a naturally confused disposition, oppressed by the sun, sees a mirage and forms the notion of water where there is no water, even though, in its basic nature, water does not exist there.’ 
 “ ‘Exactly so, son of a good family, exactly so,’ replied Dharmodgata. ‘And so too, son of a good family, do those with deep-seated attachment to a tathāgata’s form or voice mentally construct the coming or going of a tathāgata. Those who mentally construct a coming and going of a tathāgata are all said to have naturally childish dispositions, naturally confused dispositions, just like the person who forms the notion of water where there is no water. And why? It is because a tathāgata should not be viewed as a form body; the tathāgatas are dharma bodies. Son of a good family, the true nature of dharmas does not come or go, and similarly there is no coming or going of the tathāgatas. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, it is just like this: there is no coming or going of a group of elephants, or a group of horses, or a group of chariots, or a group of infantry conjured up by a magician. Similarly, son of a good family, there is no coming or going of a tathāgata’s body. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, it is just like this: in a dream a person who has fallen asleep  sees one or two or three or four or five or ten or twenty or thirty or forty or fifty or even more tathāgatas than that, but when they wake up, they do not see even a single tathāgata. Son of a good family, what do you think, did those tathāgatas come from anywhere or go anywhere?’
 “ ‘Son of a good family,’ replied Sadāprarudita, ‘there is no dharma established at all in a dream. A dream is lie. It is not real.’
 “ ‘Exactly, son of a good family,’ said Dharmodgata. ‘The Tathāgata has said, “All dharmas are like a dream.” Son of a good family, those who do not understand that the Tathāgata’s teaching “all dharmas are like a dream” is in accord with reality have a deep-seated attachment to a tathāgata as a name body or form body. Those who do not understand the true nature of dharmas like that mentally construct the coming or going of a tathāgata. Those foolish, ordinary people who accept that a tathāgata has come or has gone, they all have gone, are going, and will go through the six forms of life in cyclic existence, and they are all far from the perfection of wisdom; they are all far from the buddhadharmas. 
 “ ‘Furthermore, son of a good family, those who know that the Tathāgata’s teaching “all dharmas are like a dream” is in accord with the reality that all dharmas are like a dream do not mentally construct the coming or going or production or stopping of any dharma. Those who do not mentally construct the coming or going or production or stopping of any dharma know a tathāgata as the true nature of dharmas. Those who know a tathāgata as the true nature of dharmas do not mentally construct  the coming or going of a tathāgata. Those who know that the true dharmic nature of a tathāgata is like that are close to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and they are practicing the perfection of wisdom. A city’s almsgiving to those śrāvakas of the Lord will not be in vain. They are each of them worthy of the world’s gifts. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, it is just like this: The jewels that are in the ocean do not come from the eastern direction, and they do not come from the south, west, or north, the intermediate directions, or below or above—from anywhere in the ten directions—but still those jewels arise in the ocean based on the wholesome roots of those beings. They do not arise without a cause; they have originated dependently, contingent on cause, conditions, and support, and the jewels that are held back have not changed places to be somewhere else in the worlds of the ten directions. But still, when the conditions are right, those jewels separate themselves out, and when conditions are not right, the separating out of those jewels does not occur.
 “ ‘Similarly, son of a good family, when a body of those tathāgatas comes into being, it does not come from anywhere and it does not go anywhere in the worlds of the ten directions, but still the body of those lord buddhas is not without a cause. It has come into being from earlier practice, contingent on cause and conditions, from the maturation of past actions, originated from its cause. When those conditions are right, that body comes into being, and when conditions are not right, the coming into being of that body does not manifest. 
 “ ‘Son of a good family, it is just like this: When a sound is produced from a vīṇā, it does not come from anywhere, and when it stops it does not go anywhere—it does not change places to be somewhere else. It originates dependently, contingent on causes and contingent on conditions—  namely, contingent on an oval-shaped trough, contingent on a leather skin, contingent on strings, contingent on a bow, contingent on the neck, and contingent on the energy the person expends on it. The sound originates from the vīṇā but that sound does not come out of the oval-shaped trough of the vīṇā, does not come out of the leather skin, does not come out of the strings, does not come out of the bow, does not come out of the neck, and does not come out of the energy the person expends on it. Rather, it resounds from the complete collection of them. Also, the stopping of that sound does not go anywhere. 
 “ ‘Similarly, son of a good family, the bodies of those lord buddhas come into being contingent on causes and contingent on conditions. They come into being not from a single cause and from a single condition but from many wholesome roots. The separating out of a body of a buddha is not from a single wholesome root, and itis also not without a cause, coming into being from the complete collection of many causes and conditions. It has not come from anywhere, and, when the collection of causes and conditions is not there, it also has not gone anywhere. 
 “ ‘So, son of a good family, you should view the coming and going of those tathāgatas like that. Son of a good family, you should comprehend the true dharmic nature of all dharmas like that as well. Son of a good family, so long as you have the awareness that all dharmas have not been produced and have not stopped, you will be destined for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and will definitely be practicing the perfection of wisdom and skillful means.’
 “When this explanation of tathāgatas not coming or going had been given, the earth shook greatly: the entirety of this great billionfold world system shook in six ways, that is, it shook, shook greatly, and shook violently; it quaked, quaked greatly, and quaked violently.  All of Māra’s habitations were churned up and unnerved, and the grass, branches of the trees, and forests, as many as there were, in the great billionfold world system all bowed specifically in the direction of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. Flowers out of season were strewn from the sky above and a rain of flowers descended. Śatakratu, head of the gods, and the Four Mahārājas also showered down on, showered over, and showered right over the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita divine sandalwood powder and divine flowers and said, ‘Through your power today we have also heard a lecture sprung from the ultimate that is an explanation that is antithetical to all worlds and is not for those who take a stand on the perishable collection.’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita asked the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, ‘Son of a good family, what caused this great shaking of the world to happen? What is the reason for it?’
 “ ‘Son of a good family,’ replied Dharmodgata, ‘it is because, on account of my explanation, when you asked about tathāgatas not coming and not going, eight thousand beings gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas, eighty billion produced the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and for sixty-four thousand beings the dust-free and stainless Dharma eye became clear.’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita became endowed with an immense joy and delight, thinking, ‘I have found something excellent to find,  because this explanation from my asking about the perfection of wisdom, and about tathāgatas not coming and going, has worked for the welfare of so many beings. Just because of this, I, with the finest wholesome root to bring unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening to completion, will have no more uncertainty in regard to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. I will, without doubt, become a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha.’ Endowed with that joy and delight he levitated to the height of seven palm trees into the sky and, standing there at the height of seven palm trees, thought, ‘Standing in the sky, I should show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata.’ 
 “Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, seeing the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita levitating, and knowing in his mind what he was thinking, gave him divine mandārava flowers and said, ‘Son of a good family, show respect to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata with these flowers. This is my assistance to you, because, son of a good family, through your power, the needs of many thousands of beings have been looked after. Son of a good family, those enthusiastic beings who remain with such enthusiasm as you have for infinite, incalculable eons for the sake of all beings are hard come by.’ 
 “The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita then took those flowers from Śatakratu, head of the gods, and showered them down on, showered them over, and showered them right over the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata and with his own body hovered over him and said to him, ‘Son of a good family,  I give myself to you from now on, to wait on you and to serve you.’ Having offered himself, he stayed in front of him with his palms cupped together in a gesture of supplication.
 “Then that merchant’s daughter and the retinue of five hundred said to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘Son of a good family, we too give ourselves to you. Through this wholesome root, may we too acquire those dharmas and may we too wait on the buddhas and bodhisattvas along with you and remain close by you.’ 
 “The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita then said to that merchant’s daughter and the five hundred, ‘Young women, if you are here with a surpassing intention in regard to me, then give yourself to me with that noblest intention and I will accept you.’
 “The young women replied, ‘Out of an absolutely surpassing intention in regard to you we are imitating you. With the noblest of intentions we give ourselves to you to do with as you want.’
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, having adorned the five hundred led by the merchant’s daughter with all adornments, and having decked out the five hundred carriages, gave them all to the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, saying, ‘I offer these attendants and these five hundred carriages to you for your enjoyment and use.’
 “Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, complimented that son of a good family, ‘Excellent, excellent, son of a good family! Bodhisattva great beings should give all their personal possessions away like that.  Bodhisattva great beings with that sort of thought to give things away will quickly and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. In that way, having worshiped the Dharma preachers, they are able to hear about the perfection of wisdom and skillful means, because those previous tathāgatas, worthy ones, unsurpassed, perfectly complete buddhas while they were previously pursuing the career of a bodhisattva also continually gave things away like that, inquired about the perfection of wisdom and skillful means, and fully accomplished unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.’
 “Then, to fully grow the wholesome root of the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata accepted the five hundred girls led by the merchant’s daughter and the five hundred carriages and, having accepted them, returned them to the son of a good family, Sadāprarudita.
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata got up from his seat and went into his house. When the sun had set it occurred to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita to think, ‘I have come like this on account of wanting the Dharma, so were I to sit or lie down it would not be becoming of me. It would not be good, so I will remain in these two ways of carrying myself—either standing or walking about—until the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata comes back to teach the Dharma. 
 “The bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata then became absorbed in a meditative stabilization for seven years, remaining in the countless, infinite meditative stabilizations of a bodhisattva that come about from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means. And during those seven years the bodhisattva great being  Sadāprarudita did not think about sense experience, did not think a malicious thought, did not think a violent thought, and was not greedy for a taste. On the contrary, he only thought, ‘When will the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata emerge? We must arrange the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata’s Dharma seat on which the son of a good family will sit and expound the Dharma, and we must sprinkle water on the ground in the place where the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata will be teaching the perfection of wisdom and skillful means, and we must smooth it out well and strew various flowers upon it.’ Those five hundred girls led by the merchant’s daughter followed the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita in the training, passing the time in the two ways of carrying themselves and using him as the model for everything they had to do. 
 “Then the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita heard a divine sound announcing, ‘In a week the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata will emerge from meditative stabilization, and having emerged he will take a seat in the middle of the city and teach the Dharma.’ Having heard that divine voice, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita felt great pleasure, rapture, and joy; he was overjoyed and felt a mental happiness. Together with the five hundred girls led by the merchant’s daughter, he swept that spot and set up a Dharma seat decorated with all the jewels. Then those young women each took off their upper shawls and spread them over that seat on which the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata was to sit and teach the Dharma. 
 “Then, when the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita wanted to sprinkle water  on that spot, Māra the wicked one made all the water disappear so that the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, unable to find water anywhere, would become depressed and unhappy and change his mind, so that his wholesome root would shrivel up and those acts of worship would lose their luster. Māra having made the water disappear, Sadāprarudita sought everywhere but could not find water.
 “It then occurred to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita to think, ‘I will stab my body and sprinkle my blood on this spot. Why? Because this spot is very dusty, and it would not be proper were dust particles to come from here and land on the body of the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata. What should I do with this body of mine that is definitely subject to destruction? It is better my body is destroyed in this sort of action than in an action over which I have no power. Put there because of the desire for sense gratification caused by sense objects, it is absolutely not appropriate that many hundreds and thousands of such bodies of mine have been destroyed under such conditions.’
 “The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita then took a sharp sword, stabbed all over his body, and sprinkled his blood all around on that very spot; and all those five hundred young ladies led by the merchant’s daughter, following the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita in their training, took sharp swords, stabbed all over their own bodies, and sprinkled their blood on that spot too. Māra the wicked one found no change in the minds of the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita and those young ladies that would have provided him an opportunity to stand in the way of their virtuous practice. 
 “Then it occurred to Śatakratu, head of the gods, to think, ‘It is amazing how much this bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita wants the Dharma, how firm he is  in his commitment, how armed he is with the great armor, how little he concerns himself with his body, life, and possessions, and how he has set out in order to reach unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, which is to say, with the surpassing aspiration, “Having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, I will free beings from the infinite sufferings of saṃsāra.” ’
 “Then Śatakratu, head of the gods, employed his controlling power to turn all that blood into divine sandalwood water, and the supreme, sublime, inconceivable fragrance of that divine sandalwood water completely filled five hundred yojanas around that spot with its aroma.
 “Śatakratu, head of the gods, then said to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita, ‘Excellent, excellent, son of a good family! Your perseverance is inconceivable, and your desire for the Dharma and your search for the Dharma are unsurpassed. Son of a good family, those previous tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas also fully accomplished unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening with such a surpassing aspiration, such perseverance, and such a desire for the Dharma.’ 
 “Then it occurred to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita to wonder, ‘I have spread out the Dharma seat for the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, I have swept this spot, and I have sprinkled it, but now, where am I going to find flowers to strew over this spot and to strew over the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata when he is explaining the Dharma?’
 “Śatakratu, head of the gods, then said to the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita,  ‘Son of a good family, take these divine mandārava flowers and spread flowers around on those places. You should also strew them over the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata when he is sitting on the lion throne explaining the Dharma.’ Saying that, he gave him a thousand loads of mandārava flowers. The bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita took those flowers and spread some of them on that spot, and some of them he kept to strew over the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata.
 “Then, after seven years had passed, the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata emerged from meditative stabilization, came specifically to where the seat for teaching the Dharma was, sat on the seat that had been spread out, and taught the perfection of wisdom at the head of a surrounding retinue of many hundreds of thousands. The moment the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita saw the bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata, he obtained a happiness just like that of a monk when he is absorbed in the first concentration with single pointed attention. 
 “You should know this bodhisattva great being Dharmodgata’s exposition of the perfection of wisdom as this: All dharmas are the same, so the perfection of wisdom is the same; all dharmas are isolated, so the perfection of wisdom is isolated; all dharmas do not move, so the perfection of wisdom does not move; all dharmas do not falsely project anything, so the perfection of wisdom does not falsely project anything; all dharmas are not puffed up, so the perfection of wisdom is not puffed up; all dharmas have one taste, so the perfection of wisdom has one taste;  all dharmas are limitless, so the perfection of wisdom is limitless; all dharmas do not arise, so the perfection of wisdom does not arise; all dharmas do not cease, so the perfection of wisdom does not cease; space has no limits, so the perfection of wisdom has no limits; the ocean has no limits, so the perfection of wisdom has no limits; Sumeru is a complex of colors, so the perfection of wisdom is a complex of colors; space is without thought construction, so the perfection of wisdom is without thought construction; form is limitless, so the perfection of wisdom is limitless, and similarly, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness are limitless, so the perfection of wisdom is limitless; the earth element is limitless, so the perfection of wisdom is limitless; the water element, fire element, and wind element are limitless, so the perfection of wisdom is limitless; the space element is limitless, so the perfection of wisdom is limitless; the diamond-like dharma, is the same so the perfection of wisdom is the same; all dharmas are unadulterated, so the perfection of wisdom is unadulterated; all dharmas are unfindable, so the perfection of wisdom is unfindable; all dharmas are in the same state of disintegration, so the perfection of wisdom is in the same state of disintegration; all dharmas are without exertion, so the perfection of wisdom is without exertion; and all dharmas are inconceivable, so the perfection of wisdom is inconceivable. 
 “Then the bodhisattva great being  Sadāprarudita, while seated just like that, generated the sarva­dharma­samatā meditative stabilization. He also came into the possession of the sarva­dharma­vivikta meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmācalana meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmāmanana meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmāstambhita meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmaikarasa meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmāparyanta meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmānutpāda meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmānirodha meditative stabilization, the gaganāparyata meditative stabilization, the samudrāparyanta meditative stabilization, the meru­vicitra meditative stabilization, the gaganākalpa meditative stabilization, the rūpāparyanta meditative stabilization, the vedanā-, saṃjñā-, saṃskāra-, and vijñānāparyanta meditative stabilizations, the pṛthivī­dhātvaparyanta meditative stabilization, the abdhātu-, tejodhātu-, and vāyu­dhātvaparyanta meditative stabilizations, the ākāśa­dhātvaparyanta meditative stabilization, the vajropama meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmāsaṃbheda meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­svabhāvānupalabdhi meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharmāvibhāvanāsamatā meditative stabilization, the sarva­dharma­niśceṣṭa meditative stabilization, and the sarva­dharmācintya meditative stabilization. Starting with those, the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita came into possession of six million meditative stabilization gateways.” 
This was the eighty-sixth chapter, “Dharmodgata,”  of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
Chapter 87: Entrusting
“Subhūti, the moment the bodhisattva great being Sadāprarudita came into possession of those six million meditative stabilization gateways, he beheld, in world systems as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the eastern direction, southern direction, western direction, and northern direction, in the intermediate directions, and in the directions below and above, the lord buddhas surrounded by a community of monks and at the head of an assembly of bodhisattvas, as many as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, teaching the perfection of wisdom in just such ways as these, with just these names, and in just these words, just as I, Subhūti, the Dharma teacher in this great billionfold world system, am now teaching the perfection of wisdom surrounded by a community of monks and at the head of an assembly of bodhisattvas in just such ways as these, with just these names, and in just these words. He became endowed with inconceivably great learning and an ocean-like erudition; he was never separated from the buddhas wherever he was born; in all his lives he took birth in places where he would come face to face with the lord buddhas; and he was not separated from the lord buddhas even in dreams. He avoided the places that preclude a perfect human birth and accomplished a perfect human birth.
 “Subhūti, from this one of many explanations, you should know that this perfection of wisdom brings about the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of a knower of all. Therefore, Subhūti, those bodhisattva great beings who want to gain the knowledge of a knower of all should practice the perfection of wisdom.”
 Then the Lord  said to venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, bodhisattvas must take up, bear in mind, read aloud, and study this perfection of wisdom in order to perfectly look after it. They must also explicate it in detail to others. Ānanda, bodhisattva great beings should listen to, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, read aloud to others, clearly articulate, teach, and recite from memory this perfection of wisdom. Having carefully written it out in a big book with the letters made clear, extremely clear, under the controlling power of the tathāgata, they should respect, revere, honor, worship, praise, and attend to it with flowers, incense, perfumes, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags and banners, and with rosaries of lamps all around it and by worshiping it in many ways. This, Ānanda, is my instruction. And why? Ānanda, what do you think, is the Tathāgata your teacher?”
 “You are my teacher, Lord. You are my teacher, Sugata,” replied Ānanda.
 The venerable Ānanda having affirmed that, the Lord said to him, “Ānanda, the Tathāgata is your teacher, and, Ānanda, you have served me with kind and touching physical action, with kind and touching verbal action, and with kind and touching mental action. Therefore, Ānanda, just as you have cherished, had serene confidence in, and venerated this body of mine in which I am now dwelling and maintaining myself, when I am gone, do the same toward this perfection of wisdom. I entrust this perfection of wisdom to you, Ānanda, a second time and  a third time so that one way or the other it does not die out, and so that you are not the last person. I pass it on to you. 
 “Know, Ānanda, that as long as this perfection of wisdom circulates in the world, the Tathāgata will remain and the Tathāgata will teach the Dharma. Know, Ānanda, that those beings who listen to, take up, bear in mind, read aloud, master, read aloud to others, clearly articulate, teach, recite from memory, and write out in letters this perfection of wisdom—those who respect, revere, honor, worship, praise, and attend to it with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags and banners, and with rosaries of lamps all around it—by worshiping it in many ways, will not become separated from seeing the Buddha, will not become separated from hearing the Dharma, and will not become separated from serving the Saṅgha. And know, Ānanda, that those beings live their lives in the presence of the Tathāgata.”
 When the Lord had said that, bodhisattva great being Maitreya and so on, venerable Subhūti, venerable Śāriputra, venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, venerable Mahākāśyapa, venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra, venerable Kātyāyana, venerable Aniruddha, venerable Revata, venerable Rāhula, and venerable Ānanda, together with the gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the teaching of the Lord.
This was the eighty-seventh chapter, “Entrusting,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”
The Noble Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines is completed. It has been translated, proofed, and prepared for publication by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra, Surendrabodhi, Yeshé Dé, and so on.