{{translation:{id:UT22084-101-146,key:toh1090,version:1.1.7,style:plain}}}
Praising the Lady Who Rules Disease
Homage to Glorious Vajrapāṇi.
O Devī, you wander in this world, naked, riding a donkey; 
Anointed with sesame oil, your hair a single plait, and with lead earrings, you are seductive and fully adorned,
While iron shackles grace your feet as anklets.
We know your nature is beautiful, and yet who can know the matter of your great ocean of activity for others? |1|
In saṃsāra, at the time of destruction, when from human bodies blood and fat ooze forth, and smoke rises,
O Devī, in a single instant you will toss all beings into your terrifying, fanged mouth.
O Kālī, you who hold a human skull, as the domain of yogic practice you take delight in cremation grounds, 
And the terrifying ringing of your bell subdues the wicked ones and dispels and quells all ills and mortal perils. |2|
Adorned with a crown of warriors’ heads, you bear a garland of heads severed on the battlefield. 
You dance with your supple arms opened wide, wearing a nāga lord as a belt across your broad hips. 
Intoxicated by the liquor of blood, in your hands you brandish a spear and sword. 
Your eyes bloodshot, you are seen by the host of bhūtas who wander cremation grounds at night. |3|
You wear a great torn hide and a half-open shawl, bound with a belt of braided straw.
With your moon-like face adorned with strings of fresh human entrails, you ring a bell at your cheek.
Your body freshly oiled and painted in patches with drops of blood, fat, and the like,
You tear at human flesh with your glistening teeth. O Kāpālikā, protect me! |4|
Fiercest among fierce ladies, terrifying, with human flesh in your mouth, the first time they saw you 
Even the mātṛkās were frightened and terrified as you flew into a rage, your bloodshot eyes flickering about‍—I bow to you!
Beautiful Kālī, your black body is so overwhelming that even Śakra and the rest are compelled
To praise you daily, and even I, Yama, will always bow trembling before you. |5|
You who bring an end to humans and all living beings,
On one side, by your ear, is an uraga, whose thousand-headed hood is spread and adorns you.
At the other ear you keep a supreme lion, as you trample the entire ocean-encircled earth. 
The sun that crosses the sky, brilliant with a thousand rays, rests directly at your navel. |6|
You are the fire that blazes forth from the expanse of the ocean,
Able to dry up the whole of the sea.
Because all women are pacified,
You are present as half of Mahādeva’s body. |7|
Durgā, Umā, Mahākālī,
To whom gods and asuras pay homage—
You who know all plagues,
Render them harmless!
Yama’s Sister, Wife of the Demon,
Sovereign Goddess of the Desire Realm‍—I praise you! |8|
This concludes “Eight Verses Praising Śrīdevī Mahākālī, the Lady Who Rules All Disease,” composed by the brahmin Vararuci.