{{translation:{id:UT22084-068-012,key:toh278,version:1.0.7,style:plain}}}
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra
The Eight Auspicious Ones
 Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling in Vaiśālī at  Āmrapālī’s grove. A Licchavi youth, Superior Skill, went to where the Blessed One was. Upon arriving, he bowed his head at the Blessed One’s feet and addressed the Blessed One with these words:
“There are some blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas presently dwelling in fulfillment of their former aspirations. If I hear about those blessed ones, I will venerate them on the crown of my head. By venerating them on the crown of my head, I will not be threatened or harmed by human or nonhuman beings, Blessed One, and when I speak at a royal palace, whatever I say will not be repudiated or overruled under any circumstance. If I remember their names, I will not even dream bad dreams while sleeping, and if I enter into a battle where swords are drawn, those swords will not strike me, and I will be delivered from it safely. I request the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha to reveal their names.”
Thus requested, the Blessed One said to the Licchavi youth Superior Skill, “Superior Skill, to the east there is a world system called Famous. The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Pradīparāja resides there.
“Superior Skill, to the east there is a world system called Free from Sorrow. The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Intent on Accomplishing Aims through Steadfast Skill resides there.
“Superior Skill, to the east there is a world system called Blissful. The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Greatly Renowned for Considering All resides there.
“Superior Skill, to the east  there is a world system called Free from Obstacles. The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Glorious Ornament of Loving-Kindness resides there.
“Superior Skill, to the east there is a world system called Nihilism Relinquished. The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Excellent Glory Renowned for Virtue resides there.
“Superior Skill, to the east there is a world system called Variegated. The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Glory of Being Renowned for Superior Skill That Is Noble like Mount Meru resides there.
“Superior Skill, to the east there is a world system called Blazing Glory. The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Glory of Being Renowned for Considering Everyone resides there.
“Superior Skill, to the east there is a world system called Joyful Renowned Diamond. The thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha named Glory of Being Renowned for Superior Skill That Brings Satisfaction resides there.
“Superior Skill, you should remember these blessed buddhas’ names very well, fully comprehend them, and uphold them. Superior Skill, while all blessed buddhas are indeed endowed with inconceivable good qualities, the buddha realms of these thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas, Superior Skill, are thoroughly pure and free from the degenerations.
“Superior Skill, when you receive and remember these thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddhas’ names, you will thereby develop their particular good qualities and others, because these names of blessed buddhas embody the qualities of their former aspirations.  You should contemplate these names whenever you lie down at dusk or at night, and you should contemplate them whenever you get up. If you contemplate these names whenever you begin any kind of worldly activity, you should know that such activities will only be for your gain and not for your loss. You should abide by this.”
Having heard this teaching, the Licchavi youth Superior Skill was satisfied and pleased, and he rejoiced. Rejoicing, he felt delighted and happy and proclaimed these thus-gone ones’ names. He scattered eight thousand flowers made of the seven precious substances over the Blessed One and circumambulated him. Remembering this Dharma discourse on the eight auspicious ones proclaiming thus-gone ones’ names, he left the Blessed One’s presence.
Then because Śakra, lord of the gods, had joined that assembly and was present, he paid homage to the Blessed One and said to him, “Blessed One, I too have taken up the practice of this Dharma discourse on the eight auspicious ones proclaiming thus-gone ones’ names.”
The Blessed One replied, “Thus, Kauśika, when you engage in battles between the gods and asuras, you should proclaim this Dharma discourse. If you proclaim it, lord of the gods, you will be victorious.
“Why is that so? Because whoever proclaims these thus-gone ones’ names is proclaimed to be blissful and fearless. Because whoever proclaims these names is proclaimed to be not overwhelmed. Because whoever proclaims these thus-gone ones’ names proclaims the names of reality. Because whoever proclaims these thus-gone ones’ names is proclaimed to completely transcend all battles.  Because whoever proclaims these thus-gone ones’ names is proclaimed to be invincible, proclaimed to be peaceful, proclaimed to be free from torment, and proclaimed to be fearless.”
Then, to venerate this Dharma discourse, Śakra, lord of the gods, scattered divine mandārava flowers over the Blessed One, bowed his head to the Blessed One’s feet, and circumambulated him three times. With a joyful mind, a virtuous mind, an unobscured mind, and a mind free from fixation, he bore in mind this Dharma discourse proclaiming thus-gone ones’ names and said, “May I see the Blessed One’s face again in the future!” Then together with the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, he departed from the Blessed One’s presence.
When the Blessed One had spoken these words, the Licchavi youth Superior Skill, Śakra, lord of the gods, and the world together with its gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
This concludes the noble Mahāyāna sūtra “The Eightfold Auspiciousness.”
Translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian preceptor Surendrabodhi and the chief editor-translator Bandé Yeshé Dé.