{{translation:{id:UT22084-062-019,key:toh219,version:1.0.5,style:plain}}}
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra
Putting an End to Karmic Obscurations
Homage to the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavat was residing with a great saṅgha of one thousand two hundred and fifty bhikṣus and seventy thousand bodhisattvas in Śrāvastī, in Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park.
Through the power of the Buddha, Venerable Śāriputra rose from his seat and with his upper robe over one shoulder, he knelt on his right knee, placed his palms together in homage, bowed toward the Bhagavat, and inquired of the Bhagavat, “Bhagavat, how should a noble son or noble daughter who has entered the Śrāvakayāna, or who has entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, or who has entered the Mahāyāna, or any other being who is seeking the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, confess their individual karmic obscurations?” 
After Venerable Śāriputra had asked that, the Bhagavat said these words to him: “Śāriputra, a noble son or noble daughter who has entered the Śrāvakayāna, or has entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, or has entered the Mahāyāna, or any other being who wishes for the highest most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, should three times each day and three times each night, with the upper robe over one shoulder, kneel on the right knee, place their palms together in homage, and say these words: 
“ ‘For the benefit of many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the benefit and healing and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans, I pay homage to the buddha bhagavats who in this present time have attained the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood in worlds in the ten directions, those buddha bhagavats who conscientiously turn the wheel of the Dharma, teach the wheel of the Dharma, possess the way of the Dharma, give the gift of the Dharma, light the lamp of the Dharma, send down the rain of the Dharma, beat the drum of the Dharma, beat the great drum of the Dharma, blow the conch of the Dharma, raise the central pillar of the Dharma, and bring satisfaction to all beings with the gift of the Dharma.
“ ‘I pay homage with my head, voice, and mind to those who are the object of offering, the object of homage, and the object of respect, and who are wise, who are attentive, who are witnesses, who are valid, who have wisdom, and who have vision. 
“ ‘While I have been circling in beginningless and endless saṃsāra, tormented by desire, tormented by anger, and tormented by stupidity, I have accumulated karmic obstructions with my body, speech, and mind. I have not acknowledged the Buddha, I have not acknowledged the Dharma, and I have not acknowledged the Saṅgha. I have not acknowledged what are good actions and what are bad ones. With malicious intent, I have caused a tathāgata to bleed, I have forsaken the Dharma, I have caused a division of the Saṅgha, I have slain a bhikṣu arhat, I have slain my parents, and I have followed the path of the ten bad actions—the three physical, the four verbal, and the three mental. I have made others commit them, I have rejoiced in their accomplishment, and I have spoken harshly to certain beings. I have maligned. I have cheated with weights. I have cheated with measures. I have made my parents unhappy. I have stolen the wealth of individuals, of stūpas, of saṅghas, and of the saṅghas of bhikṣus in the four directions. I have transgressed the vinaya and the foundations of the training. I have disobeyed the upādhyāyas and the ācāryas. I have been unpleasant to those who have entered the Śrāvakayāna, entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, entered the Mahāyāna, and every other being—I have reviled and beaten them with a mind that is obstinate, angry, envious, and miserly. I have spoken harsh words to buddha bhagavats, have said that the sublime Dharma is not the Dharma, and have said that that which is not the Dharma is the sublime Dharma.
“ ‘All of this I individually confess in the presence of the buddha bhagavats who are wise, who are attentive, who are witnesses, who are valid, who have wisdom, and who have vision. I repent them, I do not conceal them, and I will not repeat them.
“ ‘Whatever karmic obscurations obscure me—those that will cause me to be in the hell realms, in the life of an animal, or in the land of the pretas; to be among the hosts of asuras; to not be able to please the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha; and to be born in other unfortunate existences—that karma will ripen in this body and will not be experienced by anyone else. I confess each one in the presence of the buddha bhagavats, who are wise, who are attentive, who are witnesses, who are valid, who have wisdom, and who have vision. I repent them, I do not conceal them, and I will not repeat them.
“ ‘Just as the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the past, in practicing for enlightenment, confessed each of their karmic obscurations, repenting them and not concealing them, in the same way I confess each one of my karmic obscurations, repent them, do not conceal them, and will not repeat them. 
“ ‘Just as the bodhisattva mahāsattvas in the future, in practicing for enlightenment, will confess each of their karmic obscurations, repent them, and not conceal them, in the same way I confess each one of my karmic obscurations, repent them, do not conceal them, and will not repeat them. 
“ ‘Just as the bodhisattva mahāsattvas in the ten directions in the present, in practicing for enlightenment, confess each of their karmic obscurations, repent them, and do not conceal them, in the same way I confess each one of my karmic obscurations, repent them, do not conceal them, and will not repeat them.
“ ‘Just as the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the past, the future, and the present, in practicing for enlightenment, confess each of their karmic obscurations, repent them, and do not conceal them, in the same way I confess each one of my karmic obscurations, repent them, do not conceal them, and will not repeat them.’
“Thus, Śāriputra, a noble son or noble daughter who wishes to attain purity and absence of obscuration in all Dharmas should in that way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Those who wish to be reborn like a great sal tree among the kṣatriyas, rich, with great wealth—with great possessions, with gold, with herds, with many requisites, very happy, and riding in a great carriage—should also in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Those who wish to be reborn like a great sal tree among the brahmins, in a family like a great sal tree, that is rich, with great wealth—great possessions, gold, herds, many requisites, very happy, and riding in a great carriage—should also in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Those who wish to be reborn into the same way of life as that of the devas of the Cāturmahā-rāja-kāyika should in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Those who wish to be reborn among the devas of Trāyastriṃśa, with their same quality of life, should in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“In the same way, those who wish to be reborn into the same way of life as that of the devas of Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, Paranirmitavaśavartin, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapurohita, Brahmapariṣadya, Mahābrahmā, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Anabhraka, Puṇyaprasava, Bṛhatphala, Asaṃjñasattva, Sudṛśa, Sudarśana, Avṛha, Atapa, or Akaniṣṭha should in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Those who wish to be reborn among the devas who have arrived in the state of infinite space, the state of infinite consciousness, the state of nothingness, or the state of neither perception nor nonperception, with their condition of life, should in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Those who wish to reach the result of a stream entrant, the result of a once-returner, the result of a non-returner, or to manifest arhathood, should in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Those who wish to have the three knowledges, or the six higher cognitions, or the strengths, or the powers, or the final goal of the śrāvakas, or fame as a very powerful śrāvaka, or to manifest the enlightenment of a pratyekabuddha, should in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Those who wish to accomplish omniscient wisdom, completely pure wisdom, inconceivable wisdom, unequaled wisdom, and the wisdom of complete buddhahood should in this way confess their individual karmic obscurations, not conceal them, and state that they will not repeat them.
“Why is that? Śāriputra, the Tathāgata has taught, ‘All phenomena originate through dependence.’ Because of certain causes and conditions, there is creation or cessation. The qualities that transcend this have no cessation or end, and they also do not have the slightest karmic obscuration. They arise from the absence of anything that is composite. Why is that? Śāriputra, the Tathāgata has taught, ‘All phenomena are empty, have no being, have no soul, have no individuality, are unborn, are unceasing, and are noncomposite.’ 
“Śāriputra, all phenomena do not arise from self or have a self. Śāriputra, the engagement by a noble son or noble daughter in the nature of the ultimate Dharma of no being is called the end of the continuity of karmic obscuration, and that, Śāriputra, is the confession.”
Venerable Śāriputra then asked the Bhagavat, “Bhagavat, how should a noble son or noble daughter who has entered the Śrāvakayāna, or has entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, or has entered the Mahāyāna, or any other being who is seeking the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, rejoice in the roots of merit?”
After Venerable Śāriputra had asked that, the Bhagavat said to him, “Śāriputra, a noble son or noble daughter who has entered the Śrāvakayāna, or has entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, or has entered the Mahāyāna, or any other being who is seeking the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, should three times each day and three times each night, with the upper robe over one shoulder, kneel on the right knee, place their palms together in homage, and say these words:
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in whatever merit has arisen from the generosity of beings in the ten directions, from their good conduct, and from the merit that has arisen from their meditation. I rejoice in that merit with a joy that is sublime, preeminent, superior, complete, perfect, excellent, the highest, unsurpassable, superlative, unequaled, and that has no equal. 
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in whatever merit is arising from the generosity of beings in the ten directions, from their good conduct, and from the merit that is arising from their meditation. I rejoice in that merit with a joy that is … and so on, until and that has no equal. 
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in whatever merit will arise from the generosity of beings in the ten directions, from their good conduct, and from the merit that will arise from their meditation. I rejoice in that merit with a joy that is … and so on, until and that has no equal. 
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in all the roots of merit possessed by those bodhisattvas in the present who have first developed the aspiration to enlightenment, in all the accumulations of merit of bodhisattvas during a hundred eons, in all the accumulations of merit of bodhisattvas who have attained patience in the birthlessness of phenomena, in all the accumulations of merit of those who have become irreversible, and in all the accumulations of merit of bodhisattvas who have one life remaining. I rejoice in them with joy that is … and so on, until and that has no equal. 
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in all the good roots of possessing the six perfections that were produced by the bodhisattva mahāsattvas during their past bodhisattva practice. I rejoice in them with a joy that is sublime, preeminent, superior, complete, perfect, excellent, the highest, unsurpassable, none-higher, unequaled, and that has no equal.
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in all the accumulations of merit from possessing the six perfections that will be produced by the bodhisattva mahāsattvas in their bodhisattva practice in the future. I rejoice in them with a joy that is sublime, pre-eminent, superior, complete, perfect, excellent, the highest, unsurpassable, none-higher, unequaled, and that has no equal.
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in all the accumulations of merit from possessing the six perfections that are being produced by the bodhisattva mahāsattvas in their bodhisattva practice in the present. I rejoice in them with a joy that is sublime, preeminent, superior, complete, perfect, excellent, the highest, unsurpassable, none-higher, unequaled, and that has no equal.
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in the conscientious conduct of the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddhas of the past, who for the sake of benefit for many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans, attained the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood; turned the wheel of the Dharma; taught the wheel of the Dharma; possessed the way of the Dharma; gave the gift of the Dharma; lit the lamp of the Dharma; sent down the rain of the Dharma; beat the drum of the Dharma; beat the great drum of the Dharma; blew the conch of the Dharma; raised the central pillar of the Dharma; and brought satisfaction to all beings with the gift of the Dharma, through which roots of merit were generated by beings who entered the Śrāvakayāna, beings who entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, beings who entered the Bodhisattvayāna, or any other beings. I rejoice in them with a joy that is … and so on, until and that has no equal. 
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in the conscientious conduct of the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddhas of the future, who for the sake of the benefit for many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans, will attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood; turn the wheel of the Dharma; teach the wheel of the Dharma; possess the way of the Dharma; give the gift of the Dharma; light the lamp of the Dharma; send down the rain of the Dharma; beat the drum of the Dharma; beat the great drum of the Dharma; blow the conch of the Dharma; raise the central pillar of the Dharma; and bring satisfaction to all beings with the gift of the Dharma, through which roots of merit will be generated by beings who have entered the Śrāvakayāna, beings who have entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, beings who have entered the Bodhisattvayāna, or any other beings. I rejoice in them with a joy that is … and so on, until and that has no equal.
“ ‘I rejoice with the greatest joy in the conscientious conduct of the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddhas of the present time in the worlds of the ten directions, who for the sake of the benefit for many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans, have attained the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood; turn the wheel of the Dharma; teach the wheel of the Dharma; possess the way of the Dharma; give the gift of the Dharma; light the lamp of the Dharma; send down the rain of the Dharma; beat the drum of the Dharma; beat the great drum of the Dharma; blow the conch of the Dharma; raise the central pillar of the Dharma; and bring satisfaction to all beings with the gift of the Dharma, through which the roots of merit are generated by beings who have entered the Śrāvakayāna, beings who have entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, beings who have entered the Bodhisattvayāna or any other beings. I rejoice in them with a joy that is … and so on, until and that has no equal.’ 
“Śāriputra, this is rejoicing’s aggregation of merit. If a noble son or noble daughter rejoices with this merit from rejoicing, they will generate many incalculable, measureless aggregations of merit.
“Śāriputra, if the beings in not only this trichiliocosm world realm but in as many world realms as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River were all arhats, whose defilements had ceased, and if a noble son or noble daughter were to serve them for as long as they lived with clothing, food, medicines when ill, and other requisites, even then someone who rejoices through this rejoicing would create immeasurably, incalculably greater merit.
“Therefore, Śāriputra, a noble son or noble daughter who wishes for the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood should rejoice with this kind of rejoicing. A woman who wishes to attain a male’s organs, who wishes to exchange her female organs for them, should rejoice with this kind of rejoicing.”
When the Bhagavat had said that, Venerable Śāriputra said to the Bhagavat, “Bhagavat, I pray that you teach the accumulation of supplications that illuminates the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the future and gives rise to aspiration in the bodhisattvas of the present.”
When Venerable Śāriputra had said that, the Bhagavat replied to him, “Śāriputra, a noble son or noble daughter who has entered the Śrāvakayāna, or has entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, or has entered the Mahāyāna, or any other being who wishes for the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, should three times each day and three times each night, with the upper robe over one shoulder, kneel on the right knee, place their palms together in homage, and say these words:
“ ‘I pay homage to the buddha bhagavats who in this present time in the worlds of the ten directions have attained the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood. 
“ ‘Through my paying homage to those buddha bhagavats, and requesting them to turn the wheel of the Dharma, I pray that those buddha bhagavats, for the sake of benefit for many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans, turn the wheel of the Dharma. I pray that they teach the wheel of the Dharma. I pray that they possess the way of the Dharma. I pray that they give the gift of the Dharma. I pray that they light the lamp of the Dharma. I pray that they send down the rain of the Dharma. I pray that they let fall the rain of the Dharma. I pray that they beat the drum of the Dharma. I pray that they beat the great drum of the Dharma. I pray that they blow the conch of the Dharma. I pray that they raise the central pillar of the Dharma.’
“Śāriputra, a noble son or noble daughter who has entered the Śrāvakayāna, or has entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, or has entered the Mahāyāna, or any other being who wishes for the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, should three times each day and three times each night, with the upper robe over one shoulder, kneel on the right knee, place palms together in homage, and say these words:
“ ‘I pay homage to the buddha bhagavats who in this present time in the worlds of the ten directions are giving up their composite life.
“ ‘Through my paying homage to those buddha bhagavats, and requesting them to turn the wheel of the Dharma, I pray that those buddha bhagavats, for the sake of benefit for many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans, turn the wheel of the Dharma, light the lamp of the Dharma, send down the rain of the Dharma, let fall the rain of the Dharma, beat the drum of the Dharma, beat the great drum of the Dharma, blow the conch of the Dharma, raise the central pillar of the Dharma, increase the lamp of the Dharma, and satisfy all beings with the gift of the Dharma.
“ ‘I also dedicate this accumulation of supplications to the highest, most complete enlightenment. I dedicate this in such a way that it is dedicated to the highest, most complete enlightenment.’ 
“Śāriputra, this is the accumulation of supplications. If a noble son or noble daughter were to supplicate with this accumulation of supplications, they would create immeasurably, incalculably greater merit than that. 
“Śāriputra, if a noble son or noble daughter were to make an offering to the tathāgatas of the entire trichiliocosm world realm filled with the seven jewels, someone who supplicates the tathāgatas to turn the wheel of the Dharma would create immeasurably, incalculably greater merit than that.
“Śāriputra, let alone this trichiliocosm world realm—Śāriputra, if a noble son or noble daughter were to make an offering to the tathāgatas of as many trichiliocosm world realms filled with the seven jewels as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River, still, someone who supplicates the tathāgatas to turn the wheel of the Dharma would create immeasurably, incalculably greater merit than that.
“Why is that? Śāriputra, when in the past I was practicing bodhisattva conduct, I supplicated the tathāgatas to turn the wheel of the Dharma. It is because of that root of merit that Śakra, the lord of the devas, and Brahmā, the lord of Sahā, supplicated me to turn the wheel of the Dharma, saying, ‘Bhagavat, we pray that you turn the wheel of the Dharma for the sake of benefit for many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans.’
“Śāriputra, when in the past I was practicing bodhisattva conduct, I prayed that the tathāgatas remain for a long time. It is because of that root of merit that I have attained the four confidences, the ten strengths of the tathāgatas, the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha, the four discernments, great love, great compassion, and complete nirvāṇa, and that my Dharma will remain for a long time.”
When the Bhagavat had said that, Venerable Śāriputra asked the Bhagavat, “Bhagavat, how should a noble son or noble daughter who has entered the Śrāvakayāna, or has entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, or has entered the Mahāyāna, or any other being who wishes for the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, dedicate their roots of merit in order to gain omniscience?”
When Venerable Śāriputra had asked that, the Bhagavat said to him, “Śāriputra, a noble son or noble daughter who has entered the Śrāvakayāna, or has entered the Pratyekabuddhayāna, or has entered the Mahāyāna, or any other being who wishes for the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, should three times each day and three times each night say these words:
“ ‘Whatever good roots I have created while circling in beginningless and endless saṃsāra—whatever good roots I have from giving even a handful of food to the Buddha, to the Dharma, to the Saṅgha, or even to those reborn as an animal, or to any other being; whatever good roots I have from confession, from supplication, from taking refuge, or from possessing the basis of the training; whatever good roots I have from individual confessions; whatever merit I have from rejoicing; and whatever good roots I have from supplication—I gather them all into one, and with a mind that is tamed, liberated, and without grasping, I bestow all of that together on all beings. 
“ ‘Just as the buddha bhagavats, with the unimpeded wisdom of buddhahood, know their giving of the roots of merit to all beings, I give the roots of merit in the same way.
“ ‘May all beings have jewels in their hands. May they attain the treasury of space, enjoyment that knows no end, merit that knows no end, Dharma that knows no end, knowledge that knows no end, eloquence that knows no end, the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, and omniscient wisdom.
“ ‘I combine into one and unify whatever merit arises from my bestowing the roots of merit on all beings, and I dedicate it to the highest, most complete enlightenment. 
“ ‘Through this root of merit may I and all beings attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood and may we attain omniscient wisdom.
“ ‘Just as the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the past, practicing for the sake of enlightenment, dedicated their roots of merit for the sake of omniscience, in that same way I also dedicate my roots of merit for the sake of omniscience.
“ ‘Through this root of merit may I and all beings attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood and may we attain omniscient wisdom.
“ ‘Just as the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the future, practicing for the sake of enlightenment, will dedicate their roots of merit for the sake of omniscience, in that same way I also will dedicate my roots of merit for the sake of omniscience.
“ ‘Through this root of merit may I and all beings attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood and may we attain omniscient wisdom.
“ ‘Just as the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the present, practicing for the sake of enlightenment, dedicate their roots of merit for the sake of omniscience, in that same way I also dedicate my roots of merit for the sake of omniscience.
“ ‘Through this root of merit may I and all beings attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood and may we attain omniscient wisdom.
Just as the Bhagavat Tathāgata Śākyamuni sat upon the Bodhimaṇḍa; remained in the inconceivable, stainless, and extremely difficult samādhi of buddhahood; defeated evil Māra; and at dawn obtained the amṛta of wisdom that in an instant had all knowledge, had the view, had realization, had complete enlightenment, and had gained the buddhahood of the path to deathlessness, in that same way may I and all beings attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood. May we attain omniscient wisdom.
“ ‘Just as the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddhas, including the Bhagavat Tathāgata Amitābha, Varaprabha, Virtue of Light, Puṇyaprabha, Akṣobhya, Siṃha, Śatakiraṇa, Exalted Light Rays, Net of Light, Ratnārci, Prabhājvala, King of Illumination, Vibhūṣita, Ratnaketu, Dharmadhvaja, and Varāṅga, and other buddha bhagavats who attained the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, turned the wheel of the Dharma for the sake of benefit for many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans, in the same way may I and all beings attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood and turn the wheel of the Dharma for the sake of benefit for many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of multitudes of beings, devas and humans.’
“Śāriputra, that is the accumulation of dedication. The previous accumulations of merit cannot approach the vastness of this accumulation of dedication and cannot even serve as an analogy for it.
“Śāriputra, a noble son or noble daughter who obtains this sūtra, learns it, possesses it, reads it, and teaches it widely to others will develop an even greater, incalculable, measureless accumulation of merit. 
“Śāriputra, if all the past and future beings that are in a trichiliocosm world realm were to attain human bodies, and having gained human bodies, without distinction between past and future, were to each attain enlightenment, and if a noble son or noble daughter were to serve them throughout their lives with robes, food, bedding, medicine when ill, and requisites in order to honor them and revere them; and if they were to spend a heap of jewels the size of Sumeru each time they attended them; and if, when they had passed into nirvāṇa, they were to create stūpas for them ten yojanas high and made of the seven precious materials—gold, silver, pearls, beryl, crystal, white coral, and red pearls—and then make offerings to them with parasols, banners, flags, and streamers, then, Śāriputra, what do you think? Would that noble son or noble daughter generate much merit upon that basis?”
“Bhagavat, there would be much,” replied Śāriputra. “Sugata, there would be much.”
“Śāriputra,” continued the Bhagavat, “a noble son or noble daughter who possesses this sūtra, learns it, recites it, reads it, teaches it to many people, and prays for the highest, most complete enlightenment will generate even greater merit. The previous accumulations of merit cannot approach the vastness of this accumulation of merit; they cannot even serve as an analogy for it. 
“Why is that? Śāriputra, it is because a noble son or noble daughter who is established in this practice requests the buddha bhagavats in the world realms in the ten directions to turn the wheel of the Dharma.
“Śāriputra, I have taught that the giving of the Dharma is the supreme act of generosity.”
Then ten thousand beings within that assembly rose from their seats, and with their upper robes over one shoulder, knelt on their right knees, placed their palms together in homage, and bowed toward the Bhagavat. They said to the Bhagavat, “Bhagavat, we will possess this sūtra. We will teach it widely to others. We will maintain its practice. Why is that? Bhagavat, it is because we are intent upon attaining the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood through that kind of virtuous Dharma.”
Then Śakra, the lord of the devas, cast coral tree flowers over the Bhagavat and this Dharma teaching. Having scattered them, he said, “Bhagavat, this is a greatly cherished Dharma teaching that creates the roots of merit for bodhisattvas and ends the continuity of the obscuration of karma.” 
“It is like that, Kauśika, it is like that,” said the Bhagavat. “Why is that? Lord of devas, I remember that innumerable eons beyond innumerable eons in the past, there appeared in the world a tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha, one with wisdom and pure conduct, a sugata, a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, a teacher of gods and humans, a buddha, a bhagavat named Mahāraśmiskandha.
“Lord of devas, the lifespan of the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Mahāraśmiskandha was six hundred million years. His first assembly of śrāvakas numbered a trillion, and they were all arhats whose outflows had ceased. His second assembly of śrāvakas numbered ninety-eight trillion and they were all arhats whose outflows had ceased. His third assembly of śrāvakas numbered ninety-nine trillion and they were all arhats whose outflows had ceased.
“Lord of devas, the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Mahāraśmiskandha was active in order to benefit beings of the world with its devas, with its Brahmā, and with its mendicants and brahmins. 
“Lord of devas, at that time, the female Gaṅgadevī entered the gathered assembly of his followers, and present there she obtained from the Tathāgata Mahāraśmiskandha this Dharma teaching. She learned it and, having acquired it, taught it to many beings, and set forth toward the highest, most complete enlightenment. When she passed away, she left behind a female body and obtained a male’s faculties and was always thereafter reborn among devas or humans, became a cakravartin king eighty-four thousand times, and then became the Tathāgata Ratnārci.
“Kauśika, even now I see him teaching the Dharma in the east in a trillion buddha realms. 
“Kauśika, anyone who hears the name of the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Ratnārci will definitely pass into nirvāṇa. Any woman who hears the name of the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Ratnārci, or perceives him at the time of death, will have been in her last female existence.
“Lord of devas, thus this Dharma teaching is the accomplishment of the good roots of bodhisattvas and mahāsattvas, and the cherishing of the ending of karma’s obscurations.”
Then Śakra, the lord of devas, asked the Bhagavat, “What is the name of this Dharma teaching and how should we keep it?”
The Bhagavat said to Śakra, the lord of devas, “Kauśika, you should keep this Dharma teaching as Putting an End to Karmic Obscurations. Keep it as The Bodhisattva Piṭaka. Also keep it as The Ending of Doubt.”
When the Bhagavat had said those words, Śakra, the lord of devas, Venerable Śāriputra, and the world with its devas, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the words of the Bhagavat.
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra “Putting an End to Karmic Obscurations” is concluded.
Translated and revised by the upādhyāyas Jinamitra and Dānaśīla, and by the lotsawa Yeshé Dé, the chief editor, and definitively revised according to the new language reform.