{{translation:{key:toh305,version:1.0.0,style:plain}}}
The Sūtra “Declaring What Is Supreme”
 Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavān, together with a saṅgha of śrāvakas, was staying at Kalandakanivāsa in the Bamboo Grove at Rājagṛha, observing the pledge to stay in retreat during the rains. Then the Bhagavān spoke to the monks:
“Monks, there are three declarations of what is supreme. What are the three? They are the declaration of the Buddha as supreme, the declaration of the Dharma as supreme, and the declaration of the Saṅgha as supreme.
“In this regard, what is the declaration of the Buddha as supreme? It is taught that among all beings—those without legs, with two legs, with four legs, or with many legs; those with form or without form; those with perception, without perception, or neither with perception  nor without perception—the tathāgata, the arhat, the completely perfect Buddha is supreme. Those who are well disposed toward the Buddha are well disposed toward what is supreme. Those who are well disposed toward what is supreme, should understand that the ripening thereof will always be as a supreme god among gods, or a supreme human among humans. This is called the declaration of the Buddha as supreme.
“What is the declaration of the Dharma as supreme? It is taught that among all dharmas, conditioned or unconditioned, the Dharma of being free from attachment is supreme. Those who are well disposed toward the Dharma are well disposed toward the supreme. Those who are well disposed toward what is supreme, should understand that the ripening thereof will always be as a supreme god among gods, or a supreme human among humans. This is called the declaration of the Dharma as supreme.
“What is the declaration of the Saṅgha as supreme? It is taught that among all assemblies, gatherings, crowds, and retinues, the Saṅgha of śrāvakas of the tathāgata, the arhat, the completely perfect Buddha is supreme. Those who are well disposed toward the Saṅgha are well disposed toward the supreme. Those who are well disposed toward what is supreme, should understand that the ripening thereof will always be as a supreme god among gods, or a supreme human among humans. This is called the declaration of the Saṅgha as supreme.”
After the Bhagavān had spoken thus, the monks rejoiced and praised his words. 
Thus ends The Sūtra “Declaring What Is Supreme.”