{{translation:{id:UT23703-093-001,key:toh3808,version:1.2.2,style:plain}}}
The Long Explanation of the Noble Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand, Twenty-Five Thousand, and Eighteen Thousand Lines
Introduction
 We prostrate to Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta.
Introduction common to all sūtras
Having reverently bowed to the Mother of Victors,
The foremost perfection in the form of wisdom,
I want to make a Path where the Thorns Have Been Trodden Down
Because the tradition of the gurus has been of benefit to me.
 Thus did I hear 
and so on. Because he has been charged with protecting the form body and the true collection of teachings, the great noble bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, asked in the assembly, says to noble Maitreya that this is the explanation of the perfection of wisdom that he has heard, with “Thus did I hear.” 
Why does he not say, “Thus has the Lord said”? 
It is because the Lord’s tremendous teaching is not within his own range. The Lord teaches  with a single knowledge and in a single instant, simultaneously explaining to trainees of various statuses, intentions, behaviors, beliefs, and faculties, brought together from various world systems, the particulars of the impermanent, suffering, empty, selfless, unproduced, and unceasing, in a state of primordial calm, and naturally in nirvāṇa and so on; the particulars of aggregates, constituents, sense fields, dependent originations, and noble truths and so on; the particulars of the applications of mindfulness, right efforts, legs of miraculous power, and faculties and so on; and the particulars of the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, and eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha and so on—in various languages, and with various headings, various words, various miraculous powers, various appearances, and various attainments of results. As it says:
 Śāntamati, the earth element is not as big as the amount of beings known by a buddha’s knowledge,  beings in infinite, innumerable world systems in the ten directions all gathered together—a huge amount. Śāntamati, if all those beings were to gain a human form all at once, and all those beings were to become endowed with the wisdom and knowledge of the elder Śāriputra, and all that Śāriputra-like wisdom and knowledge of all those beings were to be in a single being—if all beings were to become endowed with the wisdom and knowledge as in that analogy, and if, Śāntamati, all those beings were to entertain, judge, and ferret out questions and doubts for an eon, or more than an eon, and all the doubts one person had were not to be the doubts of a second, and, Śāntamati, were they, having in mind all the different doubts of all the beings as in that analogy, to go before the Lord and voice in a finger snap those doubts and questions, the Lord would, with one thought, become mindful of them all, and grasping all the doubts would, by uttering one statement, remove all the doubts and questions. They would all know their own different doubts and questions, and they would all be overjoyed at the Lord’s answers to all their questions. 
Given that such a sequence of teachings to trainees by a tathāgata is not totally within the range of bodhisattvas, those who recite the Dharma are not able, with their branch sequence, to teach the full range. So those who recite the Dharma expound whatever Dharma is within their range, and based on that say “thus did I hear” to reveal the sequence that came into their hearing, concluding the discourse with  “the Lord said this.” They do not say, “Thus has the Lord said.”
Ultimately the perfection of wisdom is inexpressible, so the lord buddhas do not teach dharmas to others with collections of names, phrases, and speech sounds. The tathāgatas are without thought construction, are spontaneous, are always absorbed in meditative equipoise. Nevertheless, one knows that through the force of earlier prayers, and based on the karma of beings, there are Dharma teachings in this way or that way given to trainees in their own languages. As it says:
 Śāntamati, on the night the Tathāgata fully awakens to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and up until the night he enters into nirvāṇa, he has not spoken and will not speak even a single syllable. And why? Because, Śāntamati, the Tathāgata is always absorbed in meditative equipoise. The Tathāgata does not breathe in and does not breathe out; he does not have applied thought and does not have sustained thought. Without applied and sustained thought there is no speech. The Tathāgata does not think discursively and does not sustain thought, does not make representations, does not make projections, and does not speak, utter, or make pronouncements, but still beings think, “The Tathāgata is speaking.” Again, the Tathāgata is totally absorbed in meditative equipoise and does not represent anything in verbal projections in any way, but still beings think about the spontaneous words, “The Tathāgata is teaching us the Dharma.” When the sounds of the Tathāgata’s statements come from space, beings think, “This sound has come from the mouth of the Tathāgata,”
and so on. It originates from the dharma body. Therefore,  in conclusion, when it comes in that way to a definite end, it says “that is what [the Lord] said” as an act of reverence for the good Dharma.
At one time 
means “at one time, whenever that might be.” 
Why does it not say an exact time? 
Because there is no need to do so. About this, there is no need at all to say words to the effect that it was on this day, on this date, in this month, at this time; and if it is unnecessary it is not right to say it. As for revealing the place, which is a place of worship, it is right to reveal the place in order that beings will increase their merit accumulation by being able to go there, and because there are no disputes about it. 
Alternatively, it is so there will be no disputes. Thus, the Tathāgata, appearing in various forms, during just the time span of a single instant, discourses on Dharma in various world systems, in various places, to a variety of trainees—bodhisattvas or others. But given that the wanderers to be trained—bodhisattvas or others—are all gathered as one, if you say “at that time the Tathāgata in world system X, in region X…,” this could lead to arguments or uncertainty that “he was in our place Y,” or “he was in our place Z.” Since they were worried about that happening, those who recite the Dharma did not state an exact time. 
Alternatively, taking it as saying one time when he was in Rājagṛha, given that he was in Rājagṛha many times, construe it as saying “one time.”
The Lord (bhagavat)
is one who has destroyed (bhagnavat) the four Māras. Or [he is a blessed one] who “has” (vat) an “endowment” (bhaga). Take the endowment as these six: sovereignty, wisdom, fame, glory, merit, and perseverance. Insofar as only a tathāgata ultimately has them all, that one is called “the Lord” or “Blessed One.” 
Dwelt at Rājagṛha— 
there are four dwellings: the dwellings of behavior, teaching, absorption, and retreat. 
Any work, whatever it is, counted as physical is all the dwelling of the Lord’s behavior. 
Any verbal work is the dwelling of the Lord’s teaching. 
And any mental work is the other two dwellings: he is always absorbed in meditative equipoise because of being fully absorbed in the meditative stabilizations and the four absorptions, and he is in retreat when he views the world with great compassion, and when the gods and so on arrive.
He dwelt at Rājagṛha 
on Gṛdhrakūṭa Hill.
It says two places because both the lay and religious wings were gathered there, or to teach that the form body and the collection of teachings assist the teaching. 
To demonstrate that the retainers are complete, it says
with a great community of monks,
and so on. The retainers are the monks and the bodhisattvas and so on. Both are indeed very worthy of donations, but it announces the monks first because they are honored in the world, because the Lord does not separate from them, and because they are common to all the world. It makes the prior general statement, “a great community of monks.” After that it specifies 
numbering five thousand monks,
because there is a good connection when you teach the general and then the specific. 
Having taught that he had many retainers, to teach their greatness it says about their perfect qualities that they were 
all worthy ones… with outflows dried up,
and so on.
It says all of them were worthy ones since they were all “worthy ones,” that is to say, it is teaching that there were no trainees or ordinary persons.  They are “worthy ones” because they have destroyed [from han, “to destroy”] the foe (ari); or [from rah, “to leave”: arahat, “one who has left”] because they will not take rebirth in saṃsāra; or they have completed their own purpose (svārtha); or because they are worthy [from arh, “to be worthy”] or capable of being a teacher for others, worthy of being in the Saṅgha Jewel, worthy of many kinds of worship by those foremost in the three realms, and because they uninterruptedly worship and reverence the Tathāgata by offering their practice. Hence, they were all worthy ones. 
With outflows dried up—
they are “outflows” because as four phenomena they seep onto the unwholesome roots or soak you with filthy afflictions. The four are the five objects, form and so on, that are sense object outflows; the three causes of existence that are outflows that cause existence; innate and acquired ignorance that are ignorance outflows; and the sixty-two wrong views that are view outflows. Sense object outflows are dried up by the aggregates of nontrainee morality and meditative stabilization; view outflows are dried up by the aggregate of nontrainee wisdom. The aggregate of nontrainee liberation dries up outflows that cause existence. The aggregate of nontrainee knowledge and seeing of liberation dries up ignorance outflows. Alternatively, right view at the path of seeing level, when morality is complete, dries up view outflows; right meditative stabilization at the non-returner path level, when meditative stabilization is complete, dries up sense object outflows; right knowledge and liberation at the worthy one path level, when wisdom is complete, dry up ignorance outflows; and knowledge that they are extinct and will not arise again at the level when liberation is complete dries up outflows that cause existence.
Another alternative is that on the worthy one path, sense object outflows dry up because of comprehending the cause of desire for sense objects; ignorance outflows dry up because of comprehending the cause of volitional factors, because it is said “ignorance is the condition for volitional factors”; view outflows dry up because of comprehending the cause of afflictions;  and outflows that cause existence dry up because of comprehending the causes of the aggregates. 
Another alternative is that comprehending the truth of suffering dries up view outflows because all views arise with the five aggregates for appropriation as the objective support; the elimination of the truth of origination dries up sense object outflows; realization of the truth of cessation dries up outflows that cause existence; and the development of the true path dries up ignorance outflows. 
Eliminating sense object outflows vanquishes Māra as a god; eliminating outflows that cause existence vanquishes Māra as death; eliminating ignorance outflows vanquishes Māra as afflictions; and eliminating view outflows vanquishes Māra as aggregates. They have conquered the four Māras, so their “outflows are dried up.” 
Without afflictions
means without defilement. The defilement of action is an affliction because it causes affliction; the defilement of afflictive emotion is because it afflicts; the defilement of aggregates that have come about from karmic maturation is an affliction in the sense of the afflictions to come; and the defilement of birth is because with that as a cause the afflictions come about. 
Of these, when ignorance stops, volitional factors stop is the absence of the defilement of action; when volitional factors stop, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, contact, and feeling stop is the absence of the defilement of karmic maturation; and when existence stops, birth, old age, and death stop is the nonexistence of the defilement of birth. Therefore, this teaches that they have eliminated what makes suffering, that on account of which there is suffering, that which is suffering, and what are the causes of suffering.
Furthermore, by eliminating the defilement of action they reach the happiness of full awakening; by eliminating the defilement of afflictive emotion they reach the happiness free from immorality;  by eliminating the defilement of karmic maturation they reach the happiness of tranquility; and by eliminating the defilement of birth they reach the happiness without aggregates—that is, they reach what makes happiness, that on account of which there is happiness, that which is happiness, and what is the cause of happiness. Thus, they are “without afflictions.” 
“Worthy ones” teaches their quality of being objects worthy of donations; “with outflows dried up” their quality of purity; and “without afflictions” the absence of suffering. These are the differences among these three. 
Fully controlled—
they are “fully controlled” because the world has come under their control; or because they themselves are shown deference by the world because they are a delight; or because they have taken control of their minds; or they have gained the controls. The controls are four: control over miraculous powers, control over their faculties, control over meditative stabilization, and control over wisdom. Their control over miraculous powers gives them control over the world of beings, and over the world that is their container. Their control over their faculties calms their conduct and produces the world’s delight; their control over meditative stabilization brings their mind under control; and their control over wisdom cuts afflictions, action, and maturation, freeing them from bonds so that, in control of themselves, they gain control. Because they control their faculties, they gain the dwelling of the level of conduct; because they control meditative stabilization, they gain the dwelling of the gods and the dwelling of Brahmā; because they control miraculous powers, they gain the dwelling with the play of clairvoyance; and because they control wisdom, they gain the dwelling of noble beings. Because they control their faculties, they have a complete attainment of the aggregate of morality; because they control miraculous powers, they have a complete attainment of the aggregate of meditative stabilization; because they control meditative stabilization, they have a complete attainment of the aggregate of wisdom; and because they control wisdom  they have a complete attainment of the aggregate of liberation. Morality emancipates from the bonds of bad conduct; meditative stabilization emancipates from the bonds of craving; wisdom emancipates from the bonds of bad views; and liberation emancipates from the bonds of what causes existence. So, because they are emancipated from bonds they have self-control; and because they have self-control they gain autonomy, hence they are “fully controlled.” 
They are
with their minds well freed 
teaches that they are without any defilement on the side of craving; 
and their wisdom well freed 
teaches that they are without any defilement on the side of ignorance. Thus, they are “with their minds well freed and their wisdom well freed.” Because they are free from attachment they have mental freedom and hence “their minds are well freed”; because they are free from ignorance they have the freedom of wisdom and hence “their wisdom is well freed.” Mental freedom is the meditative stabilizations and absorptions gained from eliminating primary and secondary afflictions on the side of craving; the freedom of wisdom is the path of the worthy one gained from eliminating all afflictions on the side of ignorance. There, when they gain mental freedom they are freed from obstructions to absorption; when they gain the freedom of wisdom they are freed from obstructions that are afflictions. Those free in both ways are “with their minds well freed and their wisdom well freed.” 
They are 
thoroughbreds
on account of being fearless. Because of their fearlessnesses, a sūtra says “there are five thoroughbreds: a dominant bull in a herd, free from the anxiety caused by terror of lightning strikes and so on; an elephant and a thoroughbred horse that do not fear battle; a thoroughbred lion that does not fear another’s attack;  and a thoroughbred worthy one without fear of death. In short, there are four terrors: being in terror of suffering, in terror of the fearsome, in terror of worldly dharmas, and in terror of ignorance. Those in whom those terrors are absent gain ease, gain a state without terrors, gain fearlessness, and gain relief,” respectively. Because they have no pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and so on, they have no pain and hence are not in terror of suffering. Because they have no fear of self-criticism, criticism from another, bad rebirth, penury, chastisement, no epitaph, or death, they are not in terror of the fearsome. Because they are not tainted with attaining and not attaining, fame and infamy, praise and blame, pleasure and pain they are not in terror of fearsome worldly dharmas. Because they are not blocked by ignorance, doubt, and wrong understanding they are not in terror of ignorance. Hence they are without terror and therefore “thoroughbreds.”
They are 
great bull elephants, 
that is, they have a magnificent bearing. Some have the three knowledges, some have gained detailed and thorough knowledge, some have gained the six clairvoyances, some have a prediction of knowledge, and some have a single focus—that is, they have obtained an attribute through which they have gained a special state and hence are “great bull elephants.”
With their work done, their task accomplished
teaches the state of full completion. What they definitely have to do is their “work”; ancillary work is their “task.” Their main work is freedom from all suffering, by fully completing morality, meditative stabilization, and wisdom. They are those “with their work done” when those are fully completed.  The work of fully completing the different ways of gaining a livelihood—the livelihood of those desiring little, the livelihood of those with contentment, the livelihood of those doing the ascetic practices, the livelihood of those who cause perfect delight and so on—is the “task,” in the sense that it is connected with what one personally wants to do. They are those with “their task accomplished” when those are fully completed. Thus “with their work done, their task accomplished” teaches the state of full completion of all that has to be accomplished. 
They are those
with their burden laid down. 
There are four “burdens”: the burden of the aggregates, the burden of afflictions, the burden of an avowed aim, and the burden of practice. They are burdens because they have to be laid down, eliminated, carried out, and completed, respectively. They lay down the burden of the aggregates by understanding suffering; they lay down the burden of afflictions by removing origination; they lay down the burden of an avowed aim by having meditated on the path; and they lay down the burden of practice by actualizing cessation. There, they gain the happiness where there are no aggregates by forsaking the burden of the aggregates; they gain the happiness of liberation by forsaking the burden of afflictions; they gain the happiness of full awakening by perfectly completing the burden of an avowed aim; and they gain the happiness of tranquility by fully completing the burden of practice. Hence “with their burden laid down” teaches the attainment of happiness when the burdens have been laid down. 
They are those 
with their own goal accomplished.
There are two “goals” of “their own” that are “accomplished”: eliminating harm and reaching the goal. The elimination of all the defiling obscurations that comes about from eliminating ignorance is eliminating harm; the nirvāṇa that is gained from the production of all knowledge is gaining the goal.
They are those 
with the fetters that bound them to existence broken.
The fetters that cause birth in existence are “cause-of-existence fetters.” They fetter or bind one to existence and to being human.  From the nine of them, correct view without outflows eliminates three (the fetters of wrong view, grasping-as-absolute, and doubt); attainment of absorption into the meditative stabilization without outflows eliminates three (the fetters of envy, jealousy, and anger), and, of the attachment that fetters to existence, the single side included in the desire realm; and the knowledge of the worthy one’s path eliminates three (the fetters of pride, ignorance, and attachment to existence). Therefore, it says “with the fetters that bound them to existence broken.”
They are those 
with their hearts well freed by perfect understanding.
Knowing is fully understanding and realizing, which is to say, they are those “with their heart well freed by perfect realization.” Alternatively, construe “freed” as belief in the teaching of the doctrine of the three vehicles, in the four truths, in the dharmas on the side of awakening and so on, or, alternatively, their minds are well freed by the eight deliverances.
Those 
in perfect control of their whole mind
are those who have perfect mastery over all the absorptions. Alternatively, those with perfect mastery over the nine successive absorption stations are “in perfect control of their whole mind,” being “in” a state of mastery over becoming absorbed in, abiding in, emerging from, and remaining dispassionate in cessation and meditative stabilization, by becoming absorbed and so on where they want, into what they want, and for as long as they want; becoming absorbed in and emerging in conforming order and nonconforming order, direct and reverse order, going and returning; bringing together the factors of concentration, having the objects of absorption,  and having the factors and objects; uniting factors, uniting objects, and uniting factors and objects; and combining one, combining two, not combining two, and so on, respectively.
Construe the stated qualities as follows: 
They are all worthy ones. Why? Because their outflows are dried up. Their outflows are dried up because they are without afflictions. They are without afflictions because they are fully controlled. They are fully controlled because their minds are well freed. Their minds are well freed because their wisdom is well freed. Their wisdom is well freed because they are thoroughbreds. They are thoroughbreds because they are great bull elephants. They are great bull elephants because their work is done. Their work is done because their task is accomplished. Their task is accomplished because their burden is laid down. Their burden is laid down because their own goal is accomplished. Their own goal is accomplished because they are those with the fetters that bound them to existence broken. They are those with the fetters that bound them to existence broken because their hearts are well freed by perfect understanding. And their hearts are well freed by perfect understanding because they are in perfect control of their whole mind.
Having thus taught about the monk retainers, 
with nuns numbering five hundred 
and so on teaches about the retinue of nuns, laymen, and laywomen, 
… with a vision of the Dharma,
that is, they have witnessed the state beyond suffering. This indicates that the laymen and laywomen are trainees.
 Now, revealing the bodhisattva retinue, it says
and with an unbounded, infinite number of bodhisattva great beings 
It does not limit bodhisattvas to a specific number because those in all other world systems are included as well. 
The teaching about their good qualities is 
all of whom had acquired the dhāraṇīs 
and so on. There are five types of bodhisattvas: those with a surpassing intention, those who stand in signlessness with effort, those who effortlessly stand in signlessness, those who have entered into the certain course of conduct, and those obstructed by just a single birth. They are all included in these. Those with a surpassing intention are on the first bodhisattva level; those who stand in signlessness with effort are up to the seventh level; those who effortlessly stand in signlessness are on the eighth level; those who have entered into the certain course of conduct are up to the tenth level; and from then on they are obstructed by just a single birth. They are all included in these. 
They have 
acquired the dhāraṇīs.
It is a dhāraṇī because it causes them to bear the meaning in mind. There are four dhāraṇīs: a dhāraṇī that causes bodhisattvas to obtain forbearance, secret mantra dhāraṇī, word or doctrine dhāraṇī, and meaning dhāraṇī. 
What is a dhāraṇī that acts as a cause for bodhisattvas to obtain forbearance? 
Bodhisattvas who have earlier completed the causes on the devoted course of conduct level by always leading a life of isolation, eating in moderation, restraining their senses, not starting up a conversation with just anybody, and trying not to fall off to sleep in order to produce a bodhisattva’s forbearance bear in mind those secret mantra base letters, or words—tadyathā | i ṭi mi ṭi | ki ṭi vi kṣānti | pā da ni svā hā and so on—that they say. They wonder, “What do these secret mantra bases mean? What are the actual meanings of the expression and what’s expressed?” After thus contemplating for a long time they see no meaning in what is being expressed. Seeing no meaning, they ascertain perfectly, “There is no meaning at all being expressed  in those secret mantra bases. It is certain that just the absence of an expressed meaning is the meaning of those secret mantra bases. The intrinsic absence of an expressed meaning is their meaning.” They meditate on those secret mantra bases as free from an essential expression and what is expressed. Having meditated well on those secret mantra bases free from expression and what is expressed, they perfectly ascertain that in the same fashion all dharmas are free from an essential expression and what is expressed. They think, “Just as these secret mantra bases are free from an essential expression and what is expressed, all dharmas are similarly inexpressible, so their basic nature is inexpressible.” Thus, they determine that all dharmas, in their basic nature free from an essential expression and what is expressed, are by nature inexpressible. When they have determined that, they see that all dharmas are empty of a falsely imagined nature. When they see that, they realize the essential inexpressible nature of all dharmas, on account of which a great joy arises. Because of that, they are then those who have “acquired the dhāraṇis.” Then just because of acquiring the dhāraṇīs, with that as the cause, there immediately comes into being for the bodhisattva a great forbearance in harmony with the production of the first Pramuditā level, a forbearance so called because it is able to bear the ultimate. Such a forbearance, when it arises, is dhāraṇī knowledge. Not long after they have produced that dhāraṇī forbearance they reach the Pramuditā level of those with surpassing aspiration. Therefore, you should know that this dhāraṇī forbearance is included in the devoted course of conduct level. 
What is the secret mantra dhāraṇī of bodhisattvas?
The mastery of meditative stabilization capable of exerting controlling power  is secret mantra dhāraṇī. Thus, bodhisattvas have to accumulate knowledge during the first incalculable eon. After the passing of that incalculable eon they reach the first level. On that level they engage in the purification for knowledge, and gain mastery over the attainment of practiced meditative stabilizations and absorptions. The force produced by the meditative stabilization faculty and the force produced by earlier prayers exert controlling power over the secret mantra bases, so the force of the meditative stabilization, concentrating on “may these secret mantra bases stop all the plagues, problems, diseases, and strife of beings,” stops plagues and problems. That is the way those secret mantra bases exerting controlling power are accomplished, becoming supreme and solidly efficacious. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings stationed on the higher levels fully accomplish for the sake of this or that need of beings the secret mantra words exerting controlling power in whatever way necessary. Since this is the case, they are “secret mantra dhāraṇīs,” because with such mastery of the meditative stabilization they bear the secret mantras in mind. The secret mantra bases that are objects of those dhāraṇī faculties are also “dhāraṇīs” because they are the objects of those dhāraṇīs. 
Among them, what is doctrine dhāraṇī? 
Doctrine dhāraṇī is the recollection and wisdom that bear in mind and do not forget, even after a long time, the infinite, incalculable, immeasurable doctrines included in the collection of words, the collection of phrases, and the collection of speech sounds that bodhisattvas never understood or heard before, when they have reached the levels and are listening to the doctrines of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
Among them, what is meaning dhāraṇī? 
Meaning dhāraṇī is recollection and wisdom, taken as one, that bear in mind and do not forget the infinite, incalculable, immeasurable meanings of the doctrines those bodhisattvas have borne in mind like that for an immeasurable time. 
Among them, the aforementioned dhāraṇī in the form of forbearance is of those who have earlier completed the causes, so they gain it on the devoted course of conduct level. They gain the remaining three on the first level and so on, having passed beyond the first countless eon. About them a sūtra says, “Bodhisattva great beings who possess four dharmas are perfect in dhāraṇī.” Those who have “acquired the dhāraṇīs” have the four dharmas. The four dharmas are “disdain for sense objects, absence of envy, giving up everything, and joy in the Dharma in the Bodhisattvapiṭaka and so on, which stop the four on the side opposing the equality of self and others—excessive attachment to sense objects, envy, miserliness, and lack of enthusiasm for the joy of the Dharma.” According to the sequence set forth in another sūtra, on the first level they have acquired the superior location dhāraṇī because through its force they have become a location for all holy, special qualities; on the second, the stainless, because through its force they have pure morality; on the third, the extremely stable, because through its force the perfect power of patience free from all mental disturbances is stabilized; on the fourth, the hard to conquer, because through its force one is unconquerable by all Māras and opponents; on the fifth, the good quality mind ornament dhāraṇī; on the sixth, the lamp for the knowledge maṇḍala; on the seventh, the becoming distinguished; on the eighth, the nonconceptual; on the ninth, the infinitely-doored; and on the tenth, the inexhaustible basket dhāraṇī. Hence, they have “acquired the dhāraṇīs” because on each of those different levels they gain a myriad of infinite, incalculable, immeasurable dhāraṇīs. Therefore, because such good qualities as these are shared in common with the devoted course of conduct level, it speaks of them like this. 
Alternatively, when they have become familiar with all the syllables in this perfection of wisdom, they become causes for the realization of all dharmas. Thus, a is the first letter in anutpannatva, “nonproduction,” in “all dharmas are unproduced.” When, having superimposed the meaning of nonproduction on the a, bodhisattvas consider that it means nonproduction, and through the practice of calm abiding and special insight their meditation becomes perfect, then just the single letter a appears, through the force of habituation, in the form of the nonproduction of all dharmas. In this manner a is the cause of the realization of all dharmas. Thus, when they meditate on just this a based on its meaning of nonproduction, nonorigination, the intrinsic nature of a nonexistent thing, noncessation, and so on, it is the cause of the analytic realization of each dharma. Thus it says,
What are the dhāraṇī doors? The sameness of all letters and syllables, the sameness of all spoken words, the syllable-doors, the syllable-entrances. What then are the syllable-doors, the syllable-entrances? The syllable a is the door to all dharmas being unproduced from the very beginning (ādy-anutpannatvād); ra is a door to the insight that all dharmas are without dirt (rajas),
and so on. 
Thus, based on those syllables, wisdom and recollection arise that realize all dharmas. Because they bear the meaning of those in mind they are “dhāraṇīs.” The forbearance that takes the ultimate as its objective support is produced from those dhāraṇīs as its cause.  Both that recollection and wisdom are called the forbearance dhāraṇī.
Again, when bodhisattvas become very familiar with all the combinations of just those syllables strung together, they become the causes for perfectly bearing in mind the streams of Dharma expounded swiftly and continuously by buddhas and bodhisattvas, and their meanings. When they have become extremely familiar with those collections of words, collections of phrases, and collections of speech sounds, that recollection and wisdom is called doctrine dhāraṇī and meaning dhāraṇī.
Furthermore, when bodhisattvas have perfectly meditated on just those syllables, they bestow everything like a wish-fulfilling gem. Thus, when the force of meditative stabilization and the force of earlier prayers exert sustaining power over those syllables, they become the means to do everything that has to be done—the necessary stopping of all problems and purifying of all wrongs and so on. At that time, just that knowledge that exerts sustaining power over the syllables is called secret mantra dhāraṇī. Because they are those dhāraṇīs’ necessary objective supports, the syllables are also called dhāraṇīs. 
The explanation of the man [in mantra] is “knowledge” [from the root man], and the tra is “protect” [from the root trai], so knowledge and compassion are mantra. The syllables are also mantra because they are in harmony with just them as their cause. 
Again, because they eliminate ignorance (avidyā) and produce knowledge, just those are also called knowledge (vidyā). 
They are bases [ādhāraṇī] for the stage of the knowledge of all aspects, hence they are bases. And so they get the names dhāraṇī secret mantra bases [mantrādhāraṇī] and vidyā secret mantra bases [vidyādhāraṇī]. 
Among those, bodhisattvas obtain the aforementioned forbearance dhāraṇī through the force of effort when the devoted course of conduct level is completed. The remaining three dhāraṇīs are produced through the power of prayer. On the first level, even though small they are still stable. From then on, all those dhāraṇīs are produced at a greater and greater level of excellence. Hence they have “acquired the dhāraṇīs.”
Those bodhisattvas who have acquired the dhāraṇīs, having meditated well on the noble truths and the dependent originations, gradually, on the first and second level and so on as explained in the noble sūtra The Ten Bhūmis, with that as the cause, become 
dwellers in emptiness 
of a person and in the emptiness of dharmas. When they have thus grasped and meditated on that emptiness marked as omnipresent and so on, the emptiness gateway to liberation opens. When they have mastered emptiness, the earlier things such as water, wind, fire, moon, sun, mountains, oceans, lakes, woods, regions, districts, and so on that each appeared separately as a causal sign of a phenomenon, whatever they are, do not appear separately—they appear in the form of signlessness. At that point the signlessness gateway to liberation opens. 
For those who thus dwell in the gateway of signlessness free from all causal signs there is no appearance of all three realms as three realms, and they do not desire anything there. Free from any desire for these, they do not wish for them in their minds, at which point the wishlessness gateway to liberation opens for them. When they have thus taken up in meditation the emptiness door to liberation, they dwell in the emptiness meditative stabilization. When they have thus taken up in meditation the signlessness gateway to liberation, they are free from any other experiential domain, so their range is the signless. When they see the three realms as do those who have no wishes, they do not fashion the three realms as worth wishing for. Thus, they are 
dwellers in emptiness, their range the signless, and who had not fashioned any wishes. 
Those who thus dwell well in the meditative stabilizations that are the gateways to liberation calm all elaborations, so for them four types of forbearance for sameness come about. They have no conception of self and other, so they have forbearance for self and others being the same; they have no attachment or aversion, so they have forbearance for compounded phenomena being the same; because they are nothing more than suchness, they have forbearance for all phenomena being the same; and because they think nirvāṇa and saṃsāra are the same, they have forbearance for nonabiding sameness. 
From having thus produced and become habituated to the four forbearances for sameness, ten further samenesses gradually, as explained in The Ten Bhūmis, occur: signless sameness; markless sameness; unproduced sameness; unoriginated sameness; isolated sameness; calm-from-the-beginning sameness; unelaborated sameness; no forsaking or appropriating sameness; sameness as an illusion, a dream, an apparition, an echo, the reflection of the moon in water, a reflection in a mirror, or a magical creation; and existent and nonexistent sameness.
The unelaborated dharma-constituent free from imaginary aspects is not within the range of any consciousness with causal signs or conceptualization; it is within the range of nonconceptual knowledge. Hence all dharmas are said to be signless. Therefore, because all phenomena have the thoroughly established for their nature, there is signless sameness.
Imaginary phenomena in the form of language and subject matter, the subject as the one who grasps and the object that is grasped are totally nonexistent so the imaginary mark is no mark, hence all are the same  insofar as they have no mark. 
The ultimate thoroughly established nature is not produced from itself and is not produced from causes and conditions, hence there is an unproduced sameness, and an unoriginated sameness.
The nature of suchness is free from afflictions and defilements, and free from the defilement of birth, therefore all phenomena are essentially isolated, hence there is an isolated sameness.
The nature of suchness is not produced earlier and does not cease at the end, so all phenomena are unproduced and unceasing, hence there is a calm-from-the-beginning sameness.
The subject of that ultimate nature is unelaborated perfect knowledge because it has that as its object. All phenomena are unelaborated, hence there is an unelaborated sameness. 
That ultimate nature is unmade. Ultimately there is no forsaking of one form of life and one set of aggregates and appropriating another set of aggregates. So, because there is no forsaking or appropriating, there is a no forsaking or appropriating sameness. 
Those imaginaries do not have an intrinsic nature that is dual in nature, so they are similar to an illusion and so on, hence there is a sameness as an illusion and so on. 
The thoroughly established nature does not exist as a falsely imagined existent nature and is not something nonexistent like a rabbit’s horns and so on either. Therefore, it is neither, hence there is an existent and nonexistent sameness. 
Because they thus realize the ten marks of sameness, they 
had acquired forbearance for the sameness of all dharmas.
Those dwelling in the three meditative stabilizations that are gateways to liberation, endowed with a realization of the tenfold sameness, behold beings without a protector and feel great  compassion for them. Thus, those learned in the ultimate are yet seized by compassion and confront cyclic existence when they are inclined toward nirvāṇa. And so those who avoid cyclic existence and mentally confront nirvāṇa with the practice of wisdom, and avoid nirvāṇa and confront cyclic existence with the practice of compassion, gradually, as explained in The Ten Bhūmis, come to have a proper way of paying attention. This naturally weak and unowned compounded aggregate comes about because of possessing afflictions, and conditions being complete, but it cannot come about when there is no possession of afflictions and when conditions are not complete. Hence they think, “I have to make possession of the afflictions and completion of the conditions nonexistent; but beings who have no protector would then come to be ignored, so, in order to be of benefit to beings, I should not completely and totally put an end to the compounded aggregate.” In regard to those endowed with such wisdom and compassion dwelling in this attention, they actualize by way of appearance “standing unattached in the perfection of wisdom.” This knowledge is “forbearance conforming to the practice.” Thus standing in the perfection of wisdom, an appearance marked by standing without attachment, standing completely in this dhāraṇī knowledge, they even rule as wheel-turning emperors for the sake of beings, even as they pursue life without attachment. They demonstrate many types of enjoyment of sense pleasures, again doing so without attachment to them. They accumulate a wealth of worldly belongings for the sake of beings, without attachment to them. They cultivate the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, cultivating them without attachment to nirvāṇa. They meditate on uncompounded suchness, again meditating  without attachment to it. Because they have thus acquired the special knowledge of dhāraṇī that makes such skillful means paramount, they are those who 
had acquired the dhāraṇī of nonattachment.
When they thus stand by standing without attachment, thinking that both cyclic existence and nirvāṇa are the same, exerting themselves totally for the sake of beings alone, they enter into the concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions in order to help beings, but they do not take birth through their force. They transform those concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions into just what will be of help to beings. Having thus transformed them for the sake of beings they produce the six clairvoyances: knowledge of the performance of miraculous powers, the divine eye, the divine ear, knowledge of the ways of thinking, knowledge that recollects previous existences, and knowledge that makes directly known the extinction of outflows.
Among these, knowledge of the performance of miraculous powers is of two types: transformative and magically creative. Among these, the transformative is causing the act of [the earth] moving, the act of [fire] burning, the act of the rain raining, and the act of [space] being pervasive; the act of changing one thing into something else; going, coming [through walls, etc.], shrinking or expanding; swallowing any physical object; appearing before anyone suitable, the act of appearing, the act of disappearing, or the act of controlling; eclipsing an opponent’s miraculous powers; and giving confidence, giving recollection, giving happiness, giving light, and anything else like those. The bodhisattvas do whatever beings require. 
As for the magically creative, they are of three types: magically created bodies, magically created speech, and magically created  objects. 
Among them, magically created bodies are any of the many types of magical creations that bodhisattvas demonstrate for the sake of beings: the appearances of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, animals, ghosts, and hell beings, and of śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas. They succeed in magically creating these different appearances for the sake of an infinite, incalculable number of beings instantaneously and simultaneously in an infinite, incalculable number of worlds in the ten directions.
What is magically created speech? Here bodhisattvas make magically created sounds that are heard by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, śrāvakas, and bodhisattvas assembled and arrayed as a retinue within the encircling girdle of mountains, up to as far away as the first thousandfold world system, the millionfold and the billionfold world systems, and an infinite, incalculable number of worlds in the ten directions. With those sounds they teach the Dharma to all beings in many ways. With other magical creations they set them to work, cause the sky to emit the sound of Dharma teachings, and exhort those who incline toward various objects.
What are magically created objects? For the sake of poverty-stricken beings, bodhisattvas magically create food, drink, transportation, clothes, jewels, pearls, vaiḍūrya, and so on. To the extent they are needed, to that extent they come about, lasting as long as the power sustaining their truth is exerted. Thus, through their knowledge of miraculous powers  they help beings. Having motivated them with miraculous wonder-working powers, they introduce them to Buddhist doctrine. And they also help suffering beings in many other ways.
With knowledge that recollects previous existences they recollect the earlier behavior of beings, know what agrees with them, and teach them Buddhist doctrine. Alternatively, they recollect the supreme, marvelous behavior of bodhisattvas and demonstrate it perfectly, to perfectly engender faith in beings. They demonstrate to proponents of eternalism and nihilism what happened previously and destroy their views. With that knowledge they recollect their own previous existences; they also recollect the previous suffering existences of others, and they also cause others to recollect their previous suffering existences. 
With their divine ear they hear the pitiful sounds of suffering beings in hell, among the animals, the ghosts, and humans, and work to relieve their pains; or they hear different Dharma teachings in various buddhafields, or right here; or they hear many different sounds urging them on. 
With their divine eye bodhisattvas see the variety of wholesome and unwholesome behaviors of beings in the ten directions and do what is appropriate. They also behold many teachings of Dharma in many retinues of tathāgatas in the many different buddhafields. 
With knowledge of others’ thoughts they know others’ greed, hatred, and so on accompanying their thoughts and do what is appropriate. They know the different faculties, behaviors, dispositions, propensities,  and so on of beings and teach the Dharma appropriately. 
With knowledge of the extinction of outflows bodhisattvas know perfectly and properly that their own and others’ afflictions are extinguished, and they know perfectly and properly whether or not they have attained the extinction of their own afflictions, and whether or not others have attained the extinction of their afflictions. They also know perfectly what is and is not the means to extinguish their own and others’ afflictions and outflows. They know perfectly whether others’ attainment of the extinction of outflows is an unfounded conceit or is true. Perfectly knowing all that, bodhisattvas themselves realize the extinction of outflows. Bodhisattvas know perfectly things with and without outflows, and with just the knowledge of the extinction of outflows they stay together with all the afflicted dharmas with outflows, without themselves becoming defiled. 
Bodhisattvas have these six clairvoyances in lifetime after lifetime. Even when they are reborn as animals they do not lose them, so they are 
with imperishable clairvoyant knowledges.
Bodhisattvas who have these six clairvoyances make an effort to help beings, and those beings they have helped experience a simultaneously arising pleasure, so they listen to the bodhisattva’s speech. Even at the cost of their life they do not go against the advice and instruction. Furthermore, they skillfully get Māra’s minions or tīrthikas and so on who bear ill will toward them to take their advice and instructions to heart. They even get those who are unwilling to listen to what they have to say by threatening them with splitting headaches and so on.  Bodhisattvas always see when it is the right time and it is not the right time and so on. Among the classes of beings there are none who are offended by the speech of the bodhisattvas. This is the very nature of the power of the dedication of the merit from the four ways of gathering a retinue and the merit of the perfections. Hence they are
with speech worth listening to.
To teach that bodhisattvas with these good qualities have a pure practice it says they are 
not hypocrites 
and so on.
It is impossible that those who have earlier entered onto a bodhisattva level would pursue wrong livelihoods, and this is particularly more so the case on the Vimalā level and so on. So why teach here that on the seventh level there is no pursuit of wrong livelihoods? 
There is no fault. Even though on lower levels they have already eliminated them, behavior that is pursued with effort is perfected here, so it has to be taught at the end. You should not take bodhisattvas standing on the seventh level as “with afflictions” and you should not take them as “without afflictions” either, because right there they absolutely eliminate afflictive behavior. Thus, the purity of their surpassing aspiration informs their physical actions, verbal actions, and mental actions. This total nonarising of all the physical, verbal, and mental actions that the tathāgatas criticize is a quality of the seventh level. Hence, to demonstrate that they do not engage in the physical actions of wrong livelihood it says they are “not hypocrites.” Because of wanting to gain something, the demonstration of a physical action that is a way of impressing another is called hypocrisy.
To demonstrate that they have no impure verbal actions it says they are 
not fawners.
Acts of speech connected with gaining something,  speaking to gain something you really want, is fawning.
To demonstrate that they have no impure mental actions it says they are 
without thoughts of reputation and gain.
Praise, citation, renown, and “reputation” are synonymous. They are so called because they are without thoughts of gain or respect. 
Having taught that they have no impure practices, to teach that they have purified practices it says they are 
Dharma teachers without thought of compensation.
This is said of those stirred by compassion and endowed with a thinking mind honed by wisdom who teach Dharma to help beings. 
Thus, having taught in these ways the qualities of those from the seventh level on down who practice signlessness with effort, now it says they are 
with perfect forbearance for the deep dharmas 
and so on, to teach the quality of standing effortlessly in signlessness. Thus, from the eighth level on up bodhisattvas cut the continuum of all effort and pass beyond all causal signs and conceptualization. They do so in a carefree way, without any effort at all. But even though they are totally at peace and expend no energy, they live a life for the sake of others because of the force of their previous prayers, and they realize the practices on the side of awakening.
To teach that on the eighth level they have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas, it says they are those “with perfect forbearance for the deep dharmas.” Thus,
 completely free from the conceptual discriminations of mind, thinking mind, and consciousness, unhindered like space, with the comprehension of the wide-open nature they have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas. O bodhisattvas! The moment bodhisattvas with such a forbearance for that have reached the Acalā level, they gain the bodhisattva’s deep stations  that are hard to understand, undifferentiated, free from all causal signs,
and so on. There are no other stations deeper than such deep stations of bodhisattvas, so it says they have “perfect forbearance for the deep dharmas.” 
Wherever they go, bodhisattvas who have gained such forbearance go with fearlessness and without trepidation, be it into a retinue of persons of royal caste, brahmins, persons of business caste, persons of low caste, gods, or Brahmās, or into a retinue of monks, nuns, tīrthikas, or Māras, and speak without feeling shy. And why? It is because they have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas and therefore fully realize the nonproduction aspect of all dharmas. Therefore, they do not have the fear that comes from not knowing something when in the midst of a retinue. Apart from their residual impressions, they have eliminated all affliction, seeing it has not been produced, so they do not have the fear that comes from the afflictions. Hence it says they 
had obtained the fearlessnesses.
To teach that they are indomitable it says they 
had transcended all the works of Māra.
They have transcended by far and transcended even farther than that all the works of Māra described below [ ff.], as well as the works of Māra described in other sūtras. 
They have
cut the continuum of karmic obscuration.
When it comes to their future lives, apart from the sorts of births they demonstrate because of compassion, as soon as they have attained this forbearance they have cut the continuum of the karmic obscurations that ripen into good or bad forms of life. 
They are 
skillful in expounding the analysis of investigations into phenomena.
“Phenomena” are the aggregates, constituents, and so on, or dharmas known by special insight;  the applications of mindfulness, the right efforts, and so on, or the dharmas on the side of awakening; the ten powers, four fearlessnesses, and so on, or the buddhadharmas; and the result of the stream enterer path and so on, or gained dharmas. “Investigations” of them are into marks, functions, causes, results, number, proper meditative experiences, faulty ones, elements, defilements, purifications, comprehensions of suffering, eliminations of origins, cessations to be actualized, and cultivations of paths. They are also investigations into the outer dharmas: world systems arise like this, will perish like this, have perished like this; they form like this, they perish for that length of time, they stay like that, they last this length of time; these are hell beings, these are birthplaces of animals, these are ghosts, these are humans, these are in the desire realm, these in the form realm, these in the formless realm; these are how many of the smallest earth, water, fire, and wind atoms there are; just this is the measure of the height, breadth, width, and depth of the earth and so on; and just these are the four continents, just this is a thousand of them, just this is a million, and just this a billion. Similarly, the investigations are the sort that investigate the intentions, propensities, behaviors, beliefs, and faculties of all the worlds: who is less at fault, who more; who is in a lineage, who is not; who is definitely in a lineage, who is not; who is a candidate, who is not; who is mature, who is not; and who is free and who is not. These are  the “investigations into phenomena.” To “analyze” is to divide those phenomena described earlier into specific categories: “these are the aggregates, these the constituents, these the sense fields,” and so on. There are the categories when they have all been categorized, when they have been divided into many specific types. To “expound” is to teach them and make them understandable to others. “Skill” is intelligence. “Investigation into phenomena” is detailed and thorough knowledge of phenomena; “categorization,” or analysis, is detailed and thorough knowledge of content; “expounding” is detailed and thorough knowledge of languages; and “skill in expounding” is detailed and thorough knowledge of ready speech. Thus, it says they are “skillful in expounding the analysis of investigations into phenomena.” 
Having thus taught the eighth level qualities, to teach the qualities of the practice on the levels above, on the levels of those who are destined, it says they are those 
with the prayer that is a vow made during an asaṃkhyeya of eons really fully carried out.
These are bodhisattvas whose “prayer that is a vow” made during “an asaṃkhyeya of eons” has been “really fully carried out.” 
What is this teaching? There are no appearances of inner physical bodies anywhere at all after the forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas has been gained. The body of names does not operate in the form of intention, thinking mind, and consciousness; it remains perfectly in the form of emptiness. External dharmas—the three realms—do not appear at all; they are in a state of liberation that is the element of signlessness. For those who thus abide perfectly extinguished in suchness, no effort, movement, false projection, or thought construction occurs. 
If those great beings thus dwell totally in nirvāṇa,  in the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, in primordial calm, in the intrinsic nature of the dharma-constituent, they would subsequently veer away from the attributes that would make them a buddha and from the welfare of beings. 
Response: The perfection of prayer that has been made complete during two incalculable eons, together with skillful means, becomes a concordant cause of compassion on account of which, at that time, in order not to veer away the maturation is developed, and those bodhisattvas again enter into the conventional. Those bodhisattvas who have entered into the conventional apprehend all inner and outer worlds just as at an earlier time. At that time, they practice the bodhisattva’s course of conduct and so on. 
Qualm: In that case, since at this level all affliction that is the origin of suffering does not exist, they do not accumulate the karma that gives rise to future lives. The force of the karma they accumulated previously is extinguished, as it is for worthy ones, so, given that a maturation cannot be apprehended in the absence of karma, how are they going to appropriate another future life? And given that above that level they are sure to swiftly and effortlessly reach the Tathāgata level in a single countless eon, how, in that case and during that period of time, will they abide in the form of anyone? 
Response: There is no fault, because here the commentators say that those perfections that bodhisattvas have previously completed during the two incalculable eons—the ones they have previously, through the perfection of skillful means, fully established in a form that is inexhaustible, and that they have through the perfection of prayer dedicated for the benefit of beings and perfect awakening—they all, after forbearance has been attained, are from then on developed into the form of a maturation. Thus, through those maturations bodhisattvas spontaneously, for as long as cyclic existence remains,  accomplish the welfare of others and perfect complete awakening. In just those forms that are developments of the maturations of their wholesome roots they take other rebirths; in just those forms of the maturations of their wholesome roots give many teachings in those lifetimes; and their many various types of magical creations work for the welfare of living beings, ripen the buddhadharmas, and cause them to reach the Tathāgata level. 
Therefore, this course of conduct is “a certain course of conduct” because it has been brought about through the force of a prayer that is a vow. The second course of conduct is certain in regard to the welfare of beings, because it is in the form of a maturation, and entering into it is not purposeless. Beings who have been brought to maturity by this course of conduct are certain in regard to the three vehicles, so it is said that all the courses of conduct done previously for the welfare of others do not amount to even a hundredth or even a thousandth part, and so on, of a bodhisattva’s certain course of conduct entered into even just for the length of a single day. Therefore, because they achieve that through the force of a prayer that is a vow it says that they are those “with the prayer that is a vow made during an asaṃkhyeya of eons really fully carried out.”
“Really fully carried out” teaches “the concordant cause that is remaining on account of the immeasurables for beings, and the concordant cause that is standing in the clairvoyances by those who travel to buddhafields” and so on—the good qualities that are the concordant causes taught in other sūtras.
 Among these, in regard to the concordant cause that is love, it says they are
with smiling countenances
because it is in the nature of things that those who have entered into the certain course of conduct have smiling faces in lifetime after lifetime. That is, in order that undisciplined beings will believe in them their countenances never ever change. 
To teach the concordant cause that is compassion it says they are 
forward in addressing others. 
Bodhisattvas go out of their way to greet even nonacquaintances who turn up unexpectedly, before, not afterward, to make them feel at ease. 
To teach the concordant cause that is joy it says they are 
without a frown on their faces.
It is in the nature of things that they do not feel the kind of irritation that makes them frown, no matter what happens. When making an effort they do not get upset like that. They do not become impatient like that with others; they do not get disturbed. 
 Now, with
skillful in communicating with others in chanted verse 
and so on, it teaches the good quality of the concordant cause that is the clairvoyances of those who travel to buddhafields. When bodhisattvas travel to buddhafields, along the way, either in their own form or in a magically created form, they teach and inspire others with the Dharma by chanting it in verse. Furthermore, having come into the presence of the tathāgatas they chant praises of them in verse and respond to their questions in verse. This demonstrates that they have attained perfect speech. 
To teach that they have attained perfect thought it says
without feelings of depression.
This is to teach that some bodhisattvas stationed on lower levels who have not completed the accumulations, and still have thought constructions when they pay attention, feel depressed in the presence of bodhisattvas stationed on higher levels and by tathāgatas, because their qualities are superior. These, however, gain ten controls over lifespan, mind, necessities, action, birth, prayer, belief, the miraculous powers, knowledge, Dharma, and absolute purity, and never have thoughts that feel depressed. Thus it says “without feelings of depression.” 
To teach the matured four detailed and thorough knowledges obtained by those with correct understanding it says 
without losing the confidence giving a readiness to speak.
Therefore, as it is said, they are great Dharma preachers:
 Stationed on the Sādhumatī level, bodhisattvas act as great Dharma preachers, guarding the Dharma treasury of the tathāgatas. Having reached the rank of a Dharma preacher, in possession of an immeasurable skill in knowledge they teach the Dharma with words produced by the four detailed and thorough knowledges. The four unbroken detailed and thorough knowledges are continuously and always operating in them.
And so on. It also says,
 They teach the Dharma in a skillful voice that is endowed with a million immeasurable special properties, up to through the immeasurable doors of the divisions of the confidence giving a readiness to speak. 
Thus it says “without losing the confidence giving a readiness to speak.”
To teach that they have gained the skill of going into assemblies, it says they are 
endowed with fearlessness when surpassing endless assemblies.
Thus, following the order in The Ten Bhūmis, there is an immeasurable skill in the workings of miraculous power, immeasurable skill in knowledge, immeasurable skill in confidence giving a readiness to speak, immeasurable skill in the manifestation of light rays, immeasurable skill in providing answers to questions, immeasurable skill in speaking in a voice with special properties, immeasurable skill in teaching the Dharma, immeasurable skill in the meditative stabilizations and dhāraṇī doors, immeasurable skill in a secret course of conduct, immeasurable skill in the divisions of the doors of the Dharma, immeasurable skill in miracles, immeasurable skill in the ten controls, immeasurable skill in objects under a buddha’s controlling power, immeasurable skill in speaking about practices on the side of awakening,  immeasurable skill in speaking about world systems, immeasurable skill in speaking about the mass of beings, immeasurable skill in speaking about the mass of those to be trained, immeasurable skill in speaking about the dharma-constituent, immeasurable skill in purifying buddhafields, and immeasurable skill in all objects within the range of the buddhas that they should enter into. Bodhisattvas extremely skilled in these twenty skills do not get anxious whatever the assembly they go into, proceeding as the seven: as lions, brahmins, and tathāgatas; fearless like the sky; with confidence; as the dominant bull; and without attachment to anything. No one eclipses them, and there is no one whom they do not eclipse, so it says of them that they are “endowed with fearlessness when surpassing endless assemblies.” 
It says they are 
skilled in going forth during an ananta of one hundred million eons. 
This teaches the concordant cause that is the perfection of perseverance in its matured form. Thus, bodhisattvas who have gained the matured perfection of perseverance do not entertain the idea that what is difficult to do is indeed difficult to do. They do not feel oppressed by what is beneficial for beings. While they strive and make an extremely great vigorous attempt many eons pass, up to a hundred thousand million billion eons pass, as in the statement, “When our Lord Śākyamuni was a bodhisattva he passed nine eons serving the buddha called Puṣya.” Thus, while making an extremely great effort a hundred thousand million billion eons pass,  but no one can go beyond an asaṃkhyeya of eons. Hence it says they are “skilled in going forth during an ananta of one hundred million eons.” 
It teaches these good qualities of the practice of the certain course of conduct in that way. In order to teach the supreme qualities of the level above, it says they are 
understanding phenomena to be like an illusion, a mirage, a reflection of the moon in water, a dream, an echo, an apparition, a reflection in the mirror, and a magical creation. 
This teaches that they have gained the sarva­dharma­pravicaya meditative stabilization, the concordant cause that is the matured perfection of wisdom. Thus, they have realized that just as illusions and so on are totally nonexistent, yet can be apprehended, similarly all phenomena are just like that. Since trainees have a variety of beliefs and aspirations it teaches with eight illustrations that are numbered relative to certain people, or in order to eliminate eight doubts.
However, there is a qualm: If you have taken phenomena to be nonexistent, how could you apprehend them through the power of their shapes and so on; and having apprehended phenomena that are not apprehendable, how could minds and mental factors come about? If phenomena do not exist, how could they appear to arise and disintegrate? If phenomena are nonexistent, how do the conventions of eating, drinking, giving, receiving, happiness, suffering, and so on become accepted; how could a collection of words and a collection of sentences and so on come about; how could things come about from causes and conditions; how could resultant features similar to the causes come about; and how could the activities of going and coming and so on come about? 
The illusion illustration is for this: “If phenomena are nonexistent how could there be shapes and so on?” To illustrate, just as a magician makes a show of a herd of elephants, a herd of horses, chariots,  and infantry, mountains, food and drink and so on through the power of shapes, even though they do not actually exist, similarly with all phenomena. 
But how do the minds and mental factors that apprehend those come about? 
To illustrate, just as mistaken minds and mental factors operate when beings apprehend a mirage, similarly with all phenomena. 
But how do they arise and disintegrate? 
This poses no problem, because all phenomena are unproduced and unceasing. To illustrate, just as there is the appearance of a reflection of the moon in water when the moon appears in the sky, and just as there is no appearance when it does not appear, even though it has no actual reality at all, similarly with all phenomena that appear when there are residual impressions left by the imagination of the unreal. They do not appear when they are not there, and hence are all unproduced and unceasing. 
How do ordinary conventions come about? 
To illustrate, just as eating, drinking, dressing, giving, receiving, happiness, suffering, and so on appear in a dream without ultimately being apprehended, similarly with all conventions. 
How do collections of words and collections of sentences come about? 
To illustrate, an echo has no essential reality as a sound, but just as one apprehends sounds from mountains and ravines that do not speak, similarly with the issuing forth of language.
How do things come about from causes and conditions? 
To illustrate, when the sense faculty is harmed, even though there are no matted falling hairs, they appear; from a place with certain particular features the city of the gandharvas and so on appears; because of the special features of a meditation the signs of extinction and so on appear; and because of the special features of thought constructions overcome by desire, sorrow, fear, and so on there are the particular appearances of conceptualized forms and so on. Even though they come about from causes, they do not exist. Similarly, all phenomena  come about from causes but do not exist. 
Given that they do not exist, how is a son produced from a father, fruit from the pits of the fruit of mango trees and so on—how do results similar to causes come about? 
To illustrate, just as you apprehend a reflection in a mirror from the appearance of a face and so on that is its cause, even though it does not exist, similarly with all phenomena. 
How do activities come about? 
Just as magical creations appear to have physical activities—going, coming, and so on—and verbal activities, even though they do not exist, similarly with all phenomena. 
Alternatively, there are eight marks: the mark of emptiness, the mark of signlessness, the mark of wishlessness, the mark of the absence of an intrinsic nature, the mark of a dependent origination, the mark of an apparition, the mark of a falsely imagined phenomenon, and the mark of a dependent phenomenon. Among these, the nonexistence of the illusory elephants and so on is emptiness; a mirage and so on that is mistaken for water and so on is signlessness; a reflection of the moon in water that has no standing anywhere is wishlessness; a dream is the absence of an intrinsic nature; an echo arises dependent on space, mountains, caves, and so on; apparitions are appearances out of the void; reflections in the mirror have a standing in the face alone—they appear as if they are standing in the mirror over there. Similarly, imaginary phenomena appear as if they are standing over there away from the consciousness. Dependent phenomena are produced dependent on conditions, like, as an analogy, magical creations that are produced dependent on the magician. You should construe them like that. 
They are 
skillful in comprehending the thoughts, conduct, and beliefs of all beings and subtle knowledge.
This teaches that by means of the concordant cause that is the perfection of knowledge, the sarva­sattva­citta­caritānugata and the dharma­dhātu­praveśa meditative stabilizations are produced. With the former of these meditative stabilizations they “comprehend,” with a single act of knowledge and in a single instant, the different “thoughts,” “conduct,” and “beliefs” in all their variety of as many beings as there are included in the category of being, in all world systems all gathered together. Having comprehended them, they understand in a single instant the means to train them and cause them to practice accordingly. 
Second, when they have gained the dharma­dhātu­praveśa meditative stabilization,
 they understand the many kinds of “subtle knowledge” of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas; that is, knowledge that enters into subtle conduct, knowledge that enters into subtle death and rebirth, knowledge that enters into subtle conception, knowledge that enters into the subtle leaving of the womb, knowledge that enters into the subtle sports education as a young boy, knowledge that enters into subtle renunciation, knowledge that enters into subtle full awakening, knowledge that enters into the subtle turning of the wheel of Dharma, knowledge that enters into the subtle employment of sustaining power over the lifespan, knowledge that enters into subtle complete nirvāṇa, knowledge that enters into maintenance of the doctrine, and knowledge that enters into the subtle secrets of the tathāgatas. These subtle secrets of the tathāgatas are as follows: secret of body, secret of speech, secret of mind, secret insight into when is and is not the right time, secret prediction of bodhisattvas, secret attracting and subjugation of beings, secret division of vehicles, secret distinguishing of the conduct and faculties of beings, secret entry into doing and what is to be done, secret conduct and full awakening, and secret  comprehension of the basic nature.
Having combined those two knowledges together it says they are “skillful in comprehending the thoughts, conduct, and beliefs of all beings and subtle knowledge.” 
With unobstructed thoughts 
teaches obtaining the concordant cause that is the perfection of power. Thus, when they have gained power in its essential matured form their minds become unobstructed by anything. What are those powers? They are the power of intention because they are without the origination of all afflictions; the power of surpassing intention because they have purified the levels’ knowledge; the power of dhāraṇī because they possess the quality of nonforgetfulness; the power of meditative stabilization because they never waver; the power of clairvoyance because they are skillful in analyzing conduct in limitless world systems; the power of faculties because they have gained the fulfillment of all their desires; the power of confidence giving a readiness to speak because they are skilled in the examination and analysis of all the buddhadharmas; the power of prayer because they practice without forsaking the conduct for all the buddhadharmas; the power of perfection because they do not forsake the conduct that will bring their own buddhadharmas to maturity, that will mature all beings, and that will benefit all beings; the power of great love because they do not forsake the effort to rescue all beings; the power of great compassion because they relieve all the suffering of all beings; the power of the true nature of dharmas because they come face to face with the true nature of dharmas that are like illusions and so on; and the power of the sustaining power of all the tathāgatas because omniscience in all its aspects has become manifest. They are in possession of just these powers that the Sūtra has described, so they have gained the true nature of dharmas that is unobstructed  by anything, and therefore it says “with unobstructed thoughts.” 
They are 
endowed with extreme patience.
Immediately after they have gained the sarva­jña­jñāna­viśeṣābhiṣekavat meditative stabilization, bodhisattvas stationed on the Dharmameghā level receive consecration with the light rays of the tathāgatas of the ten directions on the precious great king of lotuses. Immediately after that all the patience they have gained earlier becomes extremely purified, and the hundred thousand meditative stabilizations—śūraṃgama and so on—the hundred thousand dhāraṇī doors—akṣayakaraṇḍā and so on—and the forbearance for the immeasurable objects within the range of the buddhas arise. This is “just a sample” of omniscience because those have arisen.
Skilled in causing entry into reality just as it is
teaches that they have gained the ten knowledges of causing entry by means of the concordant cause that is the perfection of knowledge:
 They understand perfectly correctly and well the knowledges that cause entry because they understand the many kinds of knowledge of the tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas that cause entry—that is, the knowledge that causes entry through the way of a child, the knowledge that causes entry through dust atoms, the knowledge that causes entry through complete comprehension of the collection of buddhafields, the knowledge that causes entry through the complete comprehension of the thoughts of the collection of beings, the knowledge that causes entry through the complete comprehension that has gone everywhere, the knowledge that causes entry by demonstrating conduct opposite to what is expected, the knowledge that causes entry by demonstrating conduct that goes with the grain, the knowledge that causes entry by demonstrating conduct that goes against the grain, the knowledge that causes entry by demonstrating inconceivable conduct the worldly can understand and inconceivable conduct, and the knowledge that causes entry by demonstrating conduct śrāvakas can understand, pratyekabuddhas  can understand, bodhisattvas can understand, and tathāgatas can understand. Children of the Victor! Therefore, since the omniscience of the lord buddhas is vast and immeasurable, the knowledge that causes entry of those standing here is immeasurable too.
This all means “skillful in the reality just as it is of all that is unsurpassed.”
To teach the concordant cause that is the perfection of prayer it says 
having appropriated all the endless arrays of the buddhafields through prayer and setting out.
Because of the prayers they have previously made—“The endless arrays that there are in all the buddhafields such as the Sukhāvatī, Padmavatī, and Arciṣmatī buddhafields, may mine be like them! Or, may mine surpass them!”—and what they have caused to occur with their great perseverance because of making those prayers, it has now been appropriated within the form of a maturation.
With the meditative stabilization recollecting buddhas in an infinite number of world systems constantly and always activated 
teaches the concordant cause that is the perfection of meditative concentration. It means that because of the force of having earlier cultivated the meditative stabilization that recollects the buddhas, now they are everywhere, always; they are not separated from the presence of all those buddhas in countless, infinite world systems and effortlessly, in a mere instant, are face to face with them. 
They are 
skillful in soliciting innumerable buddhas.
This means that they are skilled in going into the presence of the lord buddhas abiding in countless, infinite world systems and requesting them to turn the wheel of the Dharma, and in requesting those who want to pass into complete nirvāṇa  to stay for a long time. 
Skillful in eliminating the various views, propensities, obsessions, and defilements 
teaches the concordant cause that is in harmony with the perfection of skillful means. They see the different aspirations, propensities, conduct, beliefs, and faculties of beings and are skilled in persistently eliminating their views and so on as appropriate. Hence it teaches that they know the range of the tathāgata’s powers as well.
Skillful in accomplishing a hundred thousand feats through meditative concentration 
teaches that they have gained mastery over the matured clairvoyances. through the power of their meditative stabilization they are skilled in playing with the clairvoyant knowledges in one hundred thousand ways. It says:
 Having gained mastery over such knowledge, with well-examined knowledge and clairvoyant knowledge, as they wish, they make world systems that have contracted expand with their sustaining power, and make world systems that have expanded contract. With their sustaining power, as they wish, they make defiled world systems pure, and make pure world systems defiled; similarly, as supreme leaders, they produce world systems that are spacious, huge, immeasurable, fine, gross, inverted, upside-down, uniformly flat, and so on, and sustain them with their sustaining power. With their sustaining power, as they wish, they put an entire world system and its encircling girdle of mountains into a single dust atom, and they display that performance without making the dust atom any bigger. With their sustaining power they put two, three, four, or five world systems, up to an inexpressible  world system, into a single dust atom, all with their encircling girdles of mountains; and without making the dust atom increase they demonstrate that performance [in reverse]. As they wish, they display the array of two world systems, up to the array of inexpressible world systems, in one world system. As they wish, they display the array of one world system in two world systems, up to inexpressible world systems. They display in one world system as many beings as there are in world systems up to the inexpressible, but without injuring the beings. They display as many beings as there are in one world system in inexpressible world systems, but without injuring the beings. As they wish, they array beings arrayed in inexpressible world systems on a single strand of hair, but without injuring the beings. As they wish, they display a single array of the objects of all the buddhas on a single strand of hair; as they wish, they display up to inexpressible arrays of the objects of all the buddhas. They, as they wish, magically create in a single instant as many bodies as there are dust atoms in inexpressible world systems. They display on each of those bodies that many arms, offer worship to the buddhas in the ten directions with them, and with each of them strew handfuls of flowers over the lord buddhas, as many as the grains of sand in the Gaṅgā River, and, as with the flowers, similarly perfumes,  flower garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners. Through their sustaining power they sustain on each of those bodies that many heads, and through their sustaining power they sustain in each head that many tongues. With each of those tongues they extol the buddhas. Having produced the thought of awakening, each goes pervading the ten directions. They also, just by the production of the thought, sustain with their sustaining power infinite, perfect full awakening, up to the great arrays of parinirvāṇa. With their sustaining power they sustain infinite bodies in the three periods of time; they sustain infinite arrays of buddhafields of infinite lord buddhas in their bodies; they sustain in their bodies all the destruction and unfolding of world systems. They emit the wind firmaments from a single pore of their bodies, but still without injuring beings. As they wish, with their sustaining power they sustain the world system as far as the waters as a single mass of water, and on that sustain the great lotus, pervade endless world systems with the array of light that shines from that lotus, and display the great branched-tree of awakening, up to exhibit the omniscience endowed with all the finest aspects. With their sustaining power they sustain in their bodies the light of jewels, lightning, the sun, and the moon of the ten directions, up to all shining light. With a single puff of breath they shake endless world systems in the ten directions but without scaring beings. And with their sustaining power they sustain in the ten directions destruction by wind, fire, and water; and in line with their intentions, they sustain, as they wish, the adornment of  the physical form-bases of all beings. With their sustaining power they sustain their body in the body of the tathāgata; sustain the body of the tathāgata in their body; sustain their own buddhafield in the body of the tathāgata; and sustain the body of the tathāgata in their own buddhafield. Thus they demonstrate a hundred thousand immeasurable and innumerable, endless amusements such as these.
Therefore, it says that they are “skillful in accomplishing a hundred thousand feats through meditative concentration.” 
 Thus, the magically created body of the Tathāgata dwelt at Rājagṛha with the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. As for the complete enjoyment body of the Tathāgata, it dwells with the bodhisattvas who are serving it, so it has given an exposition of the retinues of the two tathāgata bodies.
Introduction unique to the Perfection of Wisdom
Having fully taught the introduction common to all sūtras, now, to teach the special feature of the introduction when this perfection of wisdom is being explained, it says: 
Thereupon the Lord, having himself arranged the lion throne,
and so on. The arrangement of the seating posture has two parts: the arrangement of the lion throne, and the arrangement of the cross-legged posture. “Thereupon the Lord, having himself arranged the lion throne” teaches the lion throne. 
Sat down with his legs crossed, holding his body erect,
and so on, teaches the cross-legged posture. 
 Why does he himself arrange the lion throne? Because of two things: he does so to demonstrate that a unique discourse is greatly worthy of worship, and he does so to tame the retinues. In many other sūtras it is as follows: they say that when the Lord is teaching to those in the Śrāvaka Vehicle he sits on a seat arranged by śrāvakas; when teaching to those in the Great Vehicle he sits on a seat arranged  by bodhisattvas. When it comes to this Dharma discourse, the Lord himself arranges the seat because it is a unique discourse. It shows: “Only I myself can be comfortable on this, so it goes without saying only I can give the discourse.” Furthermore, here he tames many who have to be tamed. They have different beliefs and aspirations, so he himself arranges his seat to make a seating arrangement in harmony with them all. 
 It also explains the Dharma posture in three parts: in harmony with physical meditation he sits cross-legged because physical pliancy has to be produced; in harmony with mental meditation the body is erect because mental pliancy has to be produced; and in harmony with meditative stabilization there is a direct application of mindfulness because there has to be single-pointedness.
 Why does it teach that he focuses his mind?
 He is not in fact focusing his mind. It is in the nature of tathāgatas that they abide in this way, not otherwise. Even though tathāgatas are always in equipoise they demonstrate this conduct for those to be trained, so it has a purpose because it causes others to think, “If even the lords abide in such a practice it goes without saying that we should do so as well.”
 This introduction, furthermore, teaches in three ways: with miraculous powers of meditative stabilization, miraculous wonder-working powers, and miraculous dharma-illuminating powers. Among these, the miraculous power of meditative stabilization is twofold based on two meditative stabilizations: the miraculous power of the meditative stabilization called the samādhirāja, and the miraculous power of the meditative stabilization called the siṃhavikrīḍita. There are also two miraculous wonder-working powers: wonder-working by means of magical creation and wonder-working by means of sustaining power.  And there are two miraculous dharma-illuminating powers as well: the miraculous power of teaching in many world systems, and the miraculous power of assembling a retinue. 
 Among these, starting from 
entered into the meditative stabilization, samādhirāja by name,
up to
then the Lord, seated on that very lion throne, 
teaches the miraculous power of the samādhirāja meditative stabilization; and from 
entered into the meditative stabilization called “siṃhavikrīḍita” 
up to 
thereupon the Lord exhibited an ordinary bodily form, like that of beings in the great billionfold world system
teaches the miraculous power of the siṃhavikrīḍita meditative stabilization. From “exhibited an ordinary bodily form, like that…” up to
strewed near, strewed in front, and strewed all around
and so on teaches wonder-working by means of magical creation; then, from 
stayed there like a second story made of flowers and so on, with the dimensions of the great billionfold world system
up to
thereupon the Lord, seated on this very lion throne 
teaches wonder-working by means of sustaining power. Then, from
smiled once again 
up to
saw… the Tathāgata Śākyamuni, together with his community of monks and together with a retinue of bodhisattvas
teaches the miraculous power of teaching in many world systems; and from 
then in the east, beyond as many world systems as the sand particles in the Gaṅgā River
up to
when the Lord understood that the world with its celestial beings, Māras
and so on, teaches the miraculous power of assembling a retinue. 
 Now, in regard to these, the teaching about the miraculous power of the samādhirāja meditative stabilization  is a teaching in four parts: radiating light from the major and minor parts of the body, radiating light from the pores of the body, radiating natural light, and radiating light from the tongue. 
In regard to “entered into the meditative stabilization, samādhirāja by name,” why does the Tathāgata enter into meditative equipoise? Does he accomplish anything while not in meditative equipoise? Does he not practice?
 It is not that tathāgatas do not practice, but tathāgatas do not delight in distraction, which is not becoming, so they are always in meditative equipoise. Thus, being absorbed in meditative stabilization like this is their natural state. And why has he entered into just this meditative stabilization and not some other? Because this meditative stabilization accomplishes all aims. Therefore, it says 
the meditative stabilization… in which all meditative stabilizations are put.
This means that just this one meditative stabilization is able to accomplish all of the activities of every other individual meditative stabilization completely. And it says 
included, and by being encompassed come to meet.
They are “included” because of their intrinsic nature; they “come to meet” because of their work. The good qualities of this meditative stabilization can be known in detail from the sūtra called The King of Samādhis Sūtra. Hence, with the name king of meditative stabilizations it is taught through a creative explanation as well.
 With what is such a meditative stabilization accompanied? What kind of mark does it have? It is free from applied and sustained thought, and from joy and happiness; it is accompanied by equanimity; and its mark is immovability. 
 Why, then, is it not called the “fourth concentration”?
 The “fourth” is just an expression contingent on a first, second, and third.  In the absence of anything higher that has to be produced, tathāgatas do not enter absorption into meditative equipoises in a series, so there is no “first” and so on, and hence it does not get the name “fourth.” The samādhirāja is stated to be “not moving” because it is marked by the mere partial immovability. That meditative stabilization is not enjoyed in the form, desire, or formless realms. It is called “meditative stabilization” because it is accompanied by equanimity without outflows and is in the form of a single-pointed mind. Furthermore, based on specific actions they are simply given different names such as śūraṅgama, siṃhavikrīḍita, samādhirāja, sarva­dharmātikramaṇa, vilokita­mūrdhan, and so on. There is no division into different entities. 
First, radiating light from the major and minor parts of the body
 Having thus taught the entrance into meditative stabilization, to teach that light radiates out from the major and minor limbs of the body it says 
he beamed with his whole body.
Here, take “beamed” as unfurled, in the sense of making it possible for light rays to emerge and radiate out from all the major and minor limbs. Tathāgatas do not exert themselves by thinking, “I am going to do it,” but rather, when there is a need for something, they accomplish it through the force of their meditative stabilization. The force of the previous prayer that is a vow has fully taken hold of the meditative stabilization. You should know that those who recite the Buddha’s words have such knowledge and use such locutions as “the Tathāgata did that” and “the Tathāgata said that” just to make it conventionally acceptable. 
Issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays—
the “sixty” is repeated twice because there are the two soles of his feet. 
But why does it say exactly sixty?  There are so many light rays, so many to train, so many needs that it would be right to say “a hundred thousand one hundred million billion.” So why does it specify exactly sixty? 
Understand as follows. It is said that the light rays of a tathāgata are, by nature, in six colors: blue, yellow, red, white, saffron, and clear light, and when light rays of those six colors radiate out into the ten directions, because of the ten different directions they become sixty. 
 But the emergence of a single light ray is capable of accomplishing all aims, is it not? So why do light rays emerge from all the major and minor limbs? Indeed. But still a great exertion is exhibited in order to demonstrate a great show of respect for the discourse.
From the śrīvatsa mark—
great bodhisattvas and tathāgatas have symbols such as the śrīvatsa, the svastika, and so on in their heart region. 
 These light rays do two types of work: they do the work of illuminating world systems and they do the work of helping beings. The Sūtra itself teaches them sequentially.
 They 
became irreversible from the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
In regard to this, you should know they become irreversible through the power of the previous prayers of the lord buddhas. 
Second, radiating light from the pores of the body
Thereupon all the Lord’s hair pores—
this too is just to show respect, because faith-followers who come afterward will think, “The Tathāgata radiates light rays like this from each of his hair pores, that is, he gives this discourse having shown it great respect.” So, it is helpful to those at a later time because it gives rise to faith. You should know these light rays also do two types of work.
Third, radiating natural light
What is the difference between a tathāgata’s natural splendor and light rays? 
Light rays come from within; splendor comes from the outer skin. Alternatively, light rays come when knowledge radiates out; splendor comes when color radiates out, because the treatises also say that a buddha’s light rays arise when the Dharma is perfectly understood at the site of awakening. And a sūtra says, “The moment they are stirred by the thought, ‘When lord buddhas teach the Dharma, most previously have explained such a Dharma as this,’ light rays emerge.” So, you should know that when the light of knowledge emerges from within, light rays also arise. And you should be aware that natural light also does the two types of work. 
Fourth, radiating light from the tongue
The miraculous power of illumination with the tongue is demonstrated to presage the teaching of Dharma. The radiance from the tongue also signifies the teaching of Dharma. The emergence of lotuses from those light rays is a sign that bodhisattvas [who listen to the teaching] have definitely entered into flawlessness. The buddhas emerging from them and teaching Dharma signifies that those lotus bodhisattvas, when they bloom and grow into right and perfect complete awakening, will teach such Dharma in the different directions.
 He
entered into the meditative stabilization called siṃhavikrīḍita
and so on teaches the two miraculous powers of meditative stabilization. These miraculous powers, furthermore, show the twin aspects of cleansing the container world and helping the world of inhabitant beings. 
 The activity of cleansing the container world is for worship of the discourse. The demonstration of this cleansing is in five parts: shaking, quaking, stirring, rising, and sinking. Among these is shaking. Just as the human body does not shake, but still the legs and the arms  and so on quake, so too there is shaking when a region stirs. That same person [who has a human body] turns like a turning wheel. Like that, when the whole disk rotates it is quaking.
With the force of wind, the trees stir. Like that, when everything stirs on its own it is stirring. Each of those is subdivided into three: small, middling, and large. Of them, first there is a gentle shaking, then one more forceful than that, a great shaking, then one even more forceful than that, a violent shaking. Then, after that there is a quaking, but not rapidly, then more rapidly, a great quaking, and after that very rapidly and for a long time, a violent quaking. You should apply and explain them like that. 
Then, when the mountains at the edges—the girdle of mountains, the great encircling girdle of mountains, and so on—became elevated and the middle remained as it was, the edges rose up while the middle sank; when the middle became elevated and the mountains remained as they were, the middle rose up while the edges sank.
It then says
it became soft and oily, producing ease for all beings,
that is, produced amazement: the huge mountains and so on became soft; all the branches of the trees and so on became oily; the wind made all beings feel at ease. Construe it like that.
Helping the world of inhabitant beings
Then, because it was a benefit for all worlds, it says
the continuum of the hells and so on was cut,
and so on. It also says 
all the places that preclude a perfect human birth disappeared 
and so on. The meaning of a good situation and the freedoms is the same because “places that preclude a perfect human birth” are situations precluding clear realization. There are, furthermore, eight of these: birth in hell; birth as an animal;  birth as a ghost; birth as a barbarian in a border area; birth in a formless and thought-free existence; birth as a blind, deaf, or mute person and so on; birth with a wrong view; and birth during an eon when there is no buddha. 
 How does birth in a formless and thought-free existence disappear? 
 Those reborn in just that place that does not preclude a perfect human birth are not born there. Therefore they are also “places precluding a perfect human birth.” They have “disappeared.” It is not that their continuum has been cut. 
 That all the beings acquire eyes and so on in this way comes about through the power of the previous prayers of the buddhas. 
 It says 
the lord buddhas in other buddhafields cried out cries of delight.
“Cries of delight” (udāna) are words stirred by delight. To illustrate, just as the upward-rising vital wind (udāna) comes out involuntarily, similarly, words stirred through delight in the increase in Dharma are caused to rise up, as it were, so they are “cried out.” Seeing in this buddhafield that the lazy, the disadvantaged, and those born in states of woe have become perfectly endowed with such excellent knowledge, “Ah!”—the buddhas “cried out cries of delight” that the self-discipline, calming, restraint, observance of celibacy, and so on, engaged in when they themselves were bodhisattvas, are amazing, because through the force of dedicating them, even those who are disadvantaged like that have become 
endowed with such knowledge.
Self-discipline
is restraint of the sense faculties; “calming” is the calming of afflictive emotions with meditative stabilization and so on; 
restraint
is being bound by the code of the confession and restoration observance; 
to observe celibacy
is to exercise restraint where it is expected of a monastic and so on; and 
nonviolence toward living creatures 
is to cultivate love and so on. The result of restraint of the sense faculties is that there are no people who are blind, deaf, dumb, and so on; the result of meditative stabilization and so on is that
the insane regained their senses, those with distracted thoughts became one-pointed in their thoughts,
and so on. The result of being bound by the code of the confession and restoration observance and so on is that 
the naked found clothes, the poor found wealth, the hungry found food 
and so on. The result of observing celibacy is giving up the ten unwholesome paths of action and completing the ten wholesome paths of action and hence being free from stain and so on. The result of cultivating love and so on is they
considered every being in the same way as they considered their mother, father 
and so on, gained 
ease 
in assemblies, and gained 
knowledge.
When it says
his light, color, brilliance, and glory,
it is that his light is shining and blazing, the color is of his beautiful skin, the brilliance his force, and glory his pleasing shape and so on. 
Why does it say “towering over… shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light”? 
At that time, the Tathāgata thinks about such a great spectacle to produce respect for the Dharma discourse. The idea is that this is said because at that time such an attitude is produced in the minds of all beings. 
 Towering over with light he is 
shining forth; 
towering over with color he is 
gleaming; 
towering over with brilliance he is 
dazzling; 
and towering over with glory he is 
shedding light. 
As for 
with his light, 
he towers over the Brahmās because they feel proud of their light. With
color 
he towers over the gods; with
brilliance 
he towers over the classes of Māras and tīrthikas; and with
glory 
he towers over humans. 
Next is the demonstration of miraculous wonder-working powers. The demonstration, furthermore, is of the miraculous wonder-working power by means of magical creation. 
Thereupon the Lord exhibited an ordinary bodily form, like that of… 
This means there was not even a single unfortunate being within this encircling range of a billion mountains, no Brahmā, god, Māra, or human, in front of whom the Tathāgata did not appear. “Like that of…” means that, to set them at ease, he appeared in front of them the same size as they were. An “ordinary bodily form” means a “natural bodily form.” What sort of natural bodily form is it? It is 
the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough. 
And what is “the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough”? The body of the Tathāgata is one whose color is unlike the color of human or celestial bodies; it is one whose color is unlike anything that exists anywhere in the world. Everybody understands that even though its color appears, it is not like the color of their own bodies. And so too with the flesh, bones, hair, and nails—they are not like those of other beings. Even though they appear similarly, all ordinary beings are unsure. That body thus appears to be a body, but ordinary persons are not sure what kind of thing it is. So, this extremely radiant and vast body, a body similar to all other bodies in shape and color and so forth but whose nature is not known, “can never be seen enough.” Furthermore, even if it is known to have the nature of a diamond, the nature of gold, jewel, pearl, or beryl and so on, or that it is in the class of human bodies, in the class of celestial or Brahmā bodies,  or not even classifiable as a body, still it cannot be known how, and it cannot be categorized or reckoned. That is the meaning. 
By the sustaining power of the Lord… in the sky right above the Lord’s head, 
and so on, teaches wonder-working by means of sustaining power. 
Smiled once again 
and so on demonstrates the miraculous dharma-illuminating powers, so those standing in different world systems will be illuminated for each other, and in order to assemble a retinue. It is so that they will be pleased, delighted, and have faith. 
At the very limit… there is a world system called Ratnāvatī.
World systems are limitless, so take “at the very limit” as the limit on account of those adjacent to it. By teaching the limit of all world systems, it teaches that the bodhisattvas standing in all the world systems up to that one come to see Śākyamuni. 
 Why don’t all of them come? 
 It is because the radiance of the Buddha illuminates those for whom there is a purpose in coming, not others. This teaches that radiance-messengers exhort those who, when our Tathāgata was a bodhisattva, made a prayer that is a vow together with the Tathāgata and so on, even if they have been born in other buddhafields, because they are trainees of our Tathāgata. 
 As for
stands, stays, and maintains himself, 
that is to say, because [Ratnākara] has not passed into complete nirvāṇa, his life-faculty continuum remains; because he has no physical sicknesses he “stays”; and he “maintains himself” because he has no sudden sicknesses and lives out his span. Alternatively, because it persists, the dharma body “stands”;  the complete enjoyment body “stays”; and the magically created body “maintains itself.” 
For the most part in the form of the young—
there are two sorts of those “in the form of the young”: those based on celibacy and those based on the Bodhisattva level. Those bodhisattvas who naturally have fewer defilements and are celibate, starting from their first production of the thought of awakening up to when they stand on the tenth level, are “in the form of the young.” Those on the eighth level are also “in the form of the young”—because those who reach that level are free from all effort and conceptualization, they are “in the form of the young.” 
 As for 
gave… lotuses, 
why do buddhas give offerings of lotuses and why do they inquire about health?
 This is the conventional custom of buddhas. When ordinary faith-followers see and hear this they feel a serene confidence: “Ah! They are without arrogance and envy.” And it lets them know there are buddhas who stand in other buddhafields as well. The masters say, “They are disciplined, but not fully accomplished. He dispatches the lotuses so it will be known that the bodhisattva and his retinue are in fact trainees.”
 So, because they are not perfectly, fully accomplished, he gives the instruction, “Child of a good family, be careful in that buddhafield.” Furthermore, he says this because there are five degenerations in this buddhafield: degeneration because of afflictions, degeneration because of the time in the eon, degeneration in lifespan, degeneration in views, and degeneration in beings.
 Among these, degeneration because of afflictions is because greed, hatred, confusion, and so on are more prevalent in this buddhafield, not less. Therefore, beings engage in the ten unwholesome actions and very many wickednesses other than those as well.  And those cause the appearance of beings in hell, as animals, as ghosts, in the class of asuras, and much suffering among humans as well. Usually buddhafields are not like that. 
The time of the eon is also bad; many difficulties come about because of the time: the famine sub-eon’s force brings about a world with the excruciating suffering of recurrent famine; the sickness sub-eon’s force brings about many diseases; the armament sub-eon’s force brings about many who are violent toward one another; the force of the time during an eon when there is destruction by water makes afflictions on the side of suffering existence strong; the force of destruction by fire makes the hatred side strong; and the force of destruction by wind makes the confusion side strong, and so on. 
Degeneration in lifespan makes it uncertain how long beings live. Sometimes the lifespan is immeasurable, sometimes the lifespan is for ten years—it is never definite. Some die in the womb, some right after birth or when still an infant, others in their teens, others in the prime of life, others when half their life is over, and others when they are old and so on. Death is uncertain, and on account of that there is much pain, lamentation, suffering, mental anguish, and so on in the world. 
Degeneration in views is that extremely vile views destroy all that is wholesome. When subdivided there are the sixty-two of them. 
 There, even a thousand buddhas do not engage in curing those who have become confirmed in wrong views. All the absolute tīrthikas naturally prone to deprecate the Dharma, without serene faith, not found in the assembly, extremely disparaging, and in their nature not receptacles for the Dharma usually have mindstreams like salty soil, usually have mindstreams that have become like white garlic, minds that the good Dharma  cannot perfume. So, because this world system has been so corrupted by those five flaws all the other lord buddhas forsake it and awaken to complete awakening in other buddhafields. Our own Tathāgata, previously, when engaging in the bodhisattva’s career, made a prayer: “Having with great vigor, great patience, and great skillful means disciplined beings in just that world system others have forsaken, may I awaken fully to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening right there.” So, even though all the other lord buddhas have given it up, for our sake our Lord Buddha accepts a terribly burdensome body. Great, therefore, is his compassion. 
 These “five degenerations” are, to illustrate, like food with an extremely bitter taste that causes suffering and is inedible. Alternatively, they are like the bitter dregs of medicinal herbs extracted from butter that have to be thrown away and are unusable. Alternatively, those beings are also like cloth boiled in saffron and so on that cannot take another dye for as long as the power of the saffron has not gone. It is because of these [meanings of the word kaṣāya] that they are called “degenerations.” 
 So, because this world system has such great flaws, all the buddhas give instructions and advice to bodhisattvas going there who are not yet fully accomplished. To illustrate, if people traveling over a vast flat plain are not warned when approaching an area with dangerous thorns, clods, rocks, and so on, because they are used to the earlier ground they proceed in exactly the same fashion and experience great suffering.  Similarly, buddhas instruct these bodhisattvas, worried that something like that will happen. 
 The statement that 
bodhisattvas [born in that Sahā world system] are difficult to approach 
is not intended mainly as a criticism of those bodhisattvas, but mainly as a criticism of the world system. In such a terrible world system as this it is said “even bodhisattvas feel worried.” Having heard that such is the case those born there become disenchanted with this world and feel great faith in the Tathāgata. With 
respected, revered, honored, and worshiped,
“to respect” is to verbally praise; “to revere” is to mentally respect and value; “to honor” is to do so physically with folded hands, bowing, and circumambulating; and “to worship” is to bestow material things—flowers, incense, and so on. 
 As for
inquires about [the Lord’s] health, hopes that [the Lord] is well and free from sickness, alert and buoyant, eating well, strong, and comfortable,
he is “well” because he has no sudden illness; is “free from sickness” because of possessing the four conditions; and is “alert and buoyant,” set apart by having a physical constitution not weakened by old age and so on. “Eating well” is the result of being “well”; being “strong” is the result of being “free from sickness”; and being “comfortable” is the result of being “alert and buoyant.”
 Here you should set forth the remaining nine directions in this way. The words and endings are easy so I do not discuss them here.
Presentation of the single vehicle system
When the Lord … said to venerable Śāriputra…
Question: Why among all the many who have arrived does he speak to him alone? It contradicts what has been said above, namely,  that they think, “The Tathāgata is seated in front of me explaining the Dharma.” All those gathered there see the Tathāgata from their own personal perspective and think, “The Tathāgata is explaining the Dharma.” If the Lord has singled out one from among them all, and specifically speaks to him, why does this not conflict with the experience of the rest of the retinue? 
 Response: Let me explain. It is true that the Tathāgata manifests and explains everything to everyone. Still, he speaks to Śāriputra, and in that instant he also speaks to all. Insofar as in that one spoken instant he makes all sorts of different statements to all, those who recite the Buddha’s words are not able to recite all the dimensions of the discourse. So, summoning a stupendously brilliant knowledge of the explanation, they have recited it, having taken one dimension of the discourse suited to all the beings. 
 Alternatively, the Tathāgata begins by teaching Śāriputra because just this way causes the good Dharma to last for a long time and therefore the Tathāgata has permitted it. So, those who recite the Buddha’s words recite based on just that permission. 
 Qualm: Even so, why, in teaching the supreme explanation of the Bodhisattva Vehicle, does he set aside bodhisattvas and set the scene by speaking to just Śāriputra?
 Response: You should understand this as follows. The perfection of wisdom is a shared discourse. It is not a discourse for the sake of just bodhisattvas. And why? Because the perfection of wisdom exists as all-knowledge, the knowledge of path aspects, the knowledge of all aspects, and the three doors. There, if the Lord had set the scene by addressing any bodhisattva  it is possible that others might have thought, “This profundity is not going to be within our range,” and been ill at ease. By setting the scene with Śāriputra, the explanation becomes one shared by all beings. The others think, “This is not too profound.” So, he sets the scene with Śāriputra. It is similar later on as well, where we find the monks and others in the retinue clearly realizing the Dharma and each reaching their own goals.
 Qualm: There, even in that case, the venerable Śāriputra is one with his work done, so it is not right to set the scene with him for this discourse that has a great purpose.
 Response: Still, in regard to the fact that venerable Śāriputra has thus done his work, The White Lotus of the Good Dharma says:
 Again, Śāriputra, at a future time, after immeasurable, inconceivable, incalculable eons, when you have learned the good Dharma from many hundred thousand one hundred million billion tathāgatas, have showed devotion in various ways, and completed just this bodhisattva practice, you will become in the world, in the buddhafield called Viraja, a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha called Padmaprabha.
Thus, that venerable Śāriputra’s buddhahood was predicted.
 Qualm: How could a monk with outflows dried up, who has cut the continuum of afflictions and karma, link up with another existence and practice this bodhisattva practice for immeasurable, inconceivable eons? It does not make any sense, because, were even worthy ones to link up with rebirths, then all the worthy ones would be reborn yet again, and the unwelcome consequence would be that they have not achieved liberation. 
 Response: This too is not certain. It would be correct to say that were worthy ones to have karma and afflictions they would through the power of karma  and afflictions be reborn in suffering existence and would not achieve liberation, but not to say that worthy ones, as worthy ones, have karma and afflictions and will be reborn because of that.
 This topic should be explained in detail in the stages found in other sūtras. In them, tathāgatas see that some beings are in a lineage that is certain and some in a lineage that is not certain.
 Among them, there is no need to make a presentation based on distinctions of lineage for those in the lineage that is certain.
 Those in the lineage that is not certain meet with certain conditions and in line with those conditions become destined for the three awakenings. The tathāgatas see that and want to deliver them gradually into buddhahood. Seeing that they have stronger afflictions and duller faculties and therefore do not have the capacity to practice the bodhisattva’s excellent practices, the tathāgatas, therefore, first lead them onto the path that acts to cause the pacification of afflictions. The two, suchness and nirvāṇa, are not different, so the tathāgatas lead them to the realization of suchness-nirvāṇa. After they have been led in that way they train in morality, meditative stabilization, and wisdom again and gradually realize suchness-nirvāṇa. This is known as the “Darśana level” and also as the “stream enterer path.” Then they lead them into eliminating both attachment to sense objects and malice. By refining away their attachment to sense objects and malice, noble beings realize suchness, so this is known as the “Tanū level,” and also as the “once-returner path.” Then they lead them to the complete elimination of just that attachment and malice  whereby they realize suchness and achieve the third, “Vītarāga level.” That is also called the “non-returner’s path.” Then they further lead them to eliminate the remaining form and formless realm attachment, pride, agitation, and ignorance. Just through realizing suchness they realize the “Kṛtāvin level.” That is also called the “worthy one’s path.” Further, having led them to all those, they teach the Dharma to them in whatever way they can to produce a great desire for buddhahood. 
 Then on the Kṛtāvin level, those who desire just buddhahood have eliminated all of the afflictions because of their desire for buddhahood, but they still have not eliminated the residual impressions left by ignorance. Because they have not eliminated those, they have not eliminated all the residual impressions left by the afflictions. 
 Then the tathāgatas explain the Bodhisattva Vehicle to them. That explanation thoroughly purifies their faculties and they become endowed with the intention capable of bringing all the bodhisattva practices to completion, and gradually gain forbearance for the deep dharmas as well. 
 Thus, the tathāgatas predict the buddhahood of those with a fixed intention for the Buddha level who have eliminated all afflictions, who have total realization of the dharma-constituent, and who have gained forbearance for the deep dharmas. From that point on those standing on the eighth level become nonconceptual, effortless great bodhisattvas. When they become like that they appropriate another existence, practice the bodhisattva practices, do the work of maturing beings, and bring their own buddhadharmas to maturity. 
 How do they appropriate another existence? 
 This has two parts: the power of the condition and the power of the cause. Among these, not having eliminated the residual impressions left by the afflictions is the condition for linking up with another existence; the wholesome roots without outflows that have emerged from the causal wholesome roots with outflows  are the cause that produces another existence. You should know them from the explanation in a sūtra:
 “Sāgaramati, what are these afflictions accompanying the wholesome roots that keep saṃsāra going? They are never being satisfied with the accumulation of merit, taking up birth in existence having the intention to do so, aspiring to meet with buddhas, not getting depressed when bringing beings to maturity, endeavoring to grasp the good Dharma, being enthusiastic for whatever work beings do, not forsaking thoughts of desire for the Dharma, and not giving up the practice of the perfections. Sāgaramati, those are the afflictions accompanying the wholesome roots that keep saṃsāra going. Bodhisattvas are afflicted by them, but they are not stained by the faults of the afflictions.” 
 [Sāgaramati] asked, “Lord, if they are wholesome roots why are they called ‘afflictions’?”  The Lord said, “Sāgaramati, it is because these sorts of afflictions afflict bodhisattvas in the three realms, and the three realms come about from afflictions. Bodhisattvas are afflicted in the three realms intentionally through the power of their skillful means and production of wholesome roots. That is why they are called ‘afflictions accompanying the wholesome roots.’ They are afflictions to the extent that they connect them to the three realms, but not because they afflict their minds.
 “As an illustration, suppose, Sāgaramati, that a businessman householder has only one son, and this son, much valued, loved, a delight, and a natural joy to behold becomes a toddler, gets up to something or other, and falls into a filthy cesspool. His mother and close and distant relatives then see  the child has fallen into the filthy pit. They see him and feel a surge of adrenalin, are tormented and scream, but still do not dive into the cesspool and get the son out. Then the boy’s father arrives and sees his only son fallen into this filthy cesspool. As soon as he sees his only son his love and attachment are so intense he immediately feels no sense of repulsion, dives into the filthy cesspool, and gets him out. 
 “This, Sāgaramati, is the analogy I have given so you will understand the meaning. And what should you see as the meaning here? Sāgaramati, ‘cesspool’ is a word for the three realms; ‘only son’ words for all beings (bodhisattvas see all beings as an only son); ‘mother and close and distant relatives’ words for persons in the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles (when they see beings fallen into saṃsāra they are tormented and scream but do not dare to get them out); and ‘businessman householder’ words for the bodhisattvas.” 
When those wholesome roots that have been entirely changed into their ripened form flourish, through the power of the residual impressions left by ignorance as condition, they become the cause for producing a body. As a sūtra also says:
 Lord, just as appropriation is the condition and karma with outflows the cause of the three suffering existences, so too, Lord, the level of residual impressions left by ignorance is the condition, and karma without outflows the cause for the three mental bodies of worthy ones, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas who have attained mastery.
Now I will discuss this. 
 Question: Is this body  counted as being in this world or in another world? Is it counted as being in the desire, form, or formless realm? 
 It is not counted as a form of life, birthplace, birth, suffering existence, or world. 
 Question: Well then, what sort of body is this production? 
 It is mental. But you should view it as similar to a mental magical creation, not as an actual magical creation. It is designated another existence based on dying and being reborn. Those who have attained mastery appear in those different birthplaces and migrations if it will be beneficial for beings, but they do not appear to beings if there is no benefit. Their dying and being reborn is also just like that; and since this body is the ripening of wholesome roots without outflows, and hence a compounded phenomenon, it is also saṃsāra; it is also an uncompounded phenomenon because it is not formed from karma with outflows and afflictions. Just that is also nirvāṇa. Thus, as the Lord says:
 “Therefore, saṃsāra is both compounded and uncompounded; nirvāṇa too is both compounded and uncompounded.”
So, with skillful means, the tathāgatas earlier cause these śrāvakas as worthy ones to eliminate all defilements, and then afterward connect them with the bodhisattva path. This is the skillful means of the tathāgatas, the good Dharma lords, to make śrāvakas irreversible from awakening. It says:
 “Lord, how should we view the Tathāgata’s prediction of śrāvakas to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”  The Lord said, “My prediction of śrāvakas to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is a prediction  that has in view their lineage.” 
 “Lord, if even śrāvakas without outflows who have cut the fetters to suffering existence are in the lineage, how will they awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?” 
 The Lord said, “I will teach an illustration for that. Listen! Child of a good family, a king who received the royal consecration on the crown of his head had a son. He studied all the arts but had dull faculties, not sharp faculties, so he studied what you study later earlier, and studied later what you study earlier. So, child of a good family, what do you think—is that boy, on account of that, not the son of the king?”  “Not so, Lord; not so, Sugata,” he replied. “You still say of him that he is the king’s son.” 
 “In the same way, child of a good family, bodhisattvas in the lineage of those with dull faculties will earlier put an end to afflictions on the path of meditation, and later will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. What do you think, child of a good family, on account of that will they not have fully awakened?” “Not so, Lord; not so, Sugata.”
And so on. Again, it says:
 “Maitreya, there is one sort of family of beings, those who from the start strive for a superior qualification, who gain just the superior qualification; there is one sort of family of beings, those who from the start strive for an inferior qualification, who are satisfied by gaining just the inferior; and there is one sort of family of beings who from the start strive for an inferior qualification, gain the inferior, understand that it is lacking, are not satisfied just by that, and then strive for the superior qualification and gain the superior.”
 The Lord having said that, the bodhisattva asked him, “Lord,  someone in the third family of beings, having reached the state of a worthy one, strives for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening but does not take rebirth, so how do they reach it? You have not said definitively, Lord, there is no rebirth.”
 “Maitreya,” replied the Lord, “I do not say that their rebirth is dictated by karma and afflictive emotion; I say that theirs is an inconceivable rebirth, magically created and dedicated.”
The Introduction Chapter.
Summary of Contents
“Here, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom.”
In regard to this explanation of the perfection of wisdom, the Lord presents an exegesis by means of three gateways and eleven rounds of teaching. Taking three types of trainees as the point of departure—those who understand the perfection of wisdom by means of a brief indication, those who understand when there is an elaboration, and those who need to be led—it explains by means of 
the gateway of brief teaching, the gateway of intermediate teaching, and the gateway of detailed teaching.
 Thus the Lord, by means of the sequence of teachings in the introduction chapter, and because it is a great undertaking, has set the stage for the explanation. Then he says to the elder Śāriputra, “Here, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom.” And having given just that explanation, he then falls completely silent. This is, therefore, “the perfection of wisdom taught in brief.” 
 As the Lord had fallen completely silent, so the elder Śāriputra,  taking as his point of departure the welfare of those who understand when there is an elaboration, starts the intermediate teaching with the question, 
“How then, Lord, should bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms make an effort at the perfection of wisdom?”
Then the Lord, taking just that brief statement as his point of departure, teaching, in just that brief statement, all phenomena, and also teaching the four practices, gives an exposition in eight parts, concerning
why bodhisattvas endeavor, how bodhisattvas endeavor, the defining marks of those who endeavor, the subdivisions of those who endeavor, the instructions for the endeavor, the benefits of the endeavor, the subdivisions of the endeavor, and the specific instruction for coming to an authoritative conclusion about this exposition.
Among these, it teaches all the wholesome dharmas, from
“Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom by way of not taking their stand on it”
up to
“should cultivate great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity.”
Then, from
“who want to fully awaken to the knowledge, furnished with the best of all aspects, of a knower of all aspects,”
up to
“So, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings take to these sorts of sense objects in order to bring beings to maturity,”
is the explanation of why bodhisattvas endeavor. Then, from,
“Lord, how then should bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
and from 
“a giver of… the eight-branched confession and restoration,”
and from
“the four concentrations,”
up to
“the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha” 
is the explanation of how bodhisattvas endeavor. Then, from,
“Lord, how are bodhisattva great beings who engage with the perfection of wisdom ‘engaged’?”
up to
“do not produce an immoral thought, [a malicious thought,] a lazy thought, a distracted thought, or an intellectually confused thought”
is the explanation of the defining marks of those who endeavor. Then, from,
“Where did they die, Lord, bodhisattva great beings dwelling by means of this yogic practice of the perfection of wisdom who have taken birth here?”
up to where it predicts the awakening of 
“a hundred thousand one hundred million billion beings”
is the explanation of the subdivisions of those who endeavor. 
Then, from,
“Subhūti, starting with the perfection of wisdom, be confident in your readiness to give a Dharma discourse to the bodhisattva great beings about how bodhisattva great beings go forth in the perfection of wisdom,”
up to
“just that is the advice about the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattvas, just that is the instruction,”
teaches the instructions for the endeavor. Then, from,
“Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend form should train in the perfection of wisdom,”
up to
“because in this perfection of wisdom is detailed instruction for the three vehicles in which bodhisattva great beings should train on the level of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas,”
teaches the benefits of the endeavor. Then, from,
“Lord,  given that I do not find, do not apprehend, and do not see a bodhisattva or the perfection of wisdom,”
up to
“someone who does not teach and explain to them that such things as those are works of Māra, Subhūti, they should know is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being, and knowing that, should shun them,”
teaches the subdivisions of the endeavor. Then, from,
“Lord, you say ‘bodhisattva great being.’ What is the meaning of the term?”
up to the questions of the chief of the gods, starting with twenty-eight questions and then the series of questions and responses by the two elders, is the two-part specific instruction for coming to an authoritative conclusion about this brief exposition in terms of the meaning of the words and the characteristic marks.
 Thus, the intermediate explanation of the perfection of wisdom is completed in these stages. 
 This intermediate teaching, furthermore, is an explanation in ultimate truth mode that takes as its point of departure the knowledge of all aspects, that is, the state of the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom. 
 Then, the detailed explanation, starting with the knowledge of all aspects of the bodhisattva’s path that takes the conceptual and nonconceptual perfection of wisdom as its point of departure, gives a detailed explanation in two parts, governed by the conventional and ultimate, for the sake of those who need to be led. The teaching of the sequence of these is given below in the specific appropriate contexts. 
 Then there are the “eleven rounds” of teaching. These eleven rounds of teaching are:
the first round in which an explanation is addressed to Śāriputra; the second, a detailed explanation by the elder Subhūti;then the address to Śatakratu, then to elder Subhūti; then to the noble Maitreya, then to the elder Subhūti,then to Śatakratu, then to the elder Subhūti,then to Maitreya, then to the venerable Subhūti;and with the story of Sadāprarudita and Dharmodgata, the entrusting of the sūtra to venerable Ānanda.
Explanation of the Brief Teaching
Now I shall teach the meaning of the words in the brief statement. There, in, “Here, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom,”
“Śāriputra [Son of Śāradvatī]”
is called by the name of the elder’s mother. 
“Here”
should be construed as “in this” Great Vehicle discourse, or “in this” perfection of wisdom discourse, that is, put it together as: The bodhisattva great beings stand in this Great Vehicle, or in this perfection of wisdom. 
“Bodhisattva”—
bodhisattva is twofold: the conventional bodhisattva and the ultimate bodhisattva. The first thought that has arisen with perfect, complete awakening and beings as its objective support is called bodhisattva because it has awakening (bodhi) and beings (sattva) as its objective support. Whoever has that thought is also called a bodhisattva. Because they have thought, “Yes! I will become an unsurpassed and perfectly complete buddha and establish all beings in the absolutely complete nirvāṇa,” and because they stand, with awakening and beings as the objective support, in both the conventional and ultimate truth, in possession of the precious thought that is both wisdom and compassion, they are bodhisattvas. The ultimate bodhisattvas are the ten thoughts of awakening on the Pramuditā level, and so on. 
Other masters say:  Because of the statement “all beings are tathāgata­garbha,” all beings are born through their tathatā (“suchness” or “reality”), and that suchness has three phases: an impure phase, a pure and impure phase, and a completely pure phase. Among these, in all ordinary beings in the impure phase there is no awakening period, it is only the phase of the “sentient being state” (sattva) alone, so that suchness is given the name sattva. In superior beings in the pure and impure phase there is both a bodhi (“awakening”) period and a sattva (“sentient being state”) phase, so, that pure and impure suchness is given the name bodhisattva (“awakening and sentient being state”). The completely pure period is during the awakening period alone, so at that time it is given the name tathāgata (“realized”). As it says:“Tathāgata (‘Realized one’), Subhūti, is a term for perfect reality (‘tathatā’).” 
“Great beings”—
a bodhisattva is a great being because of being endowed with eleven types of greatness: possessing a lineage in accord with the result, a belief in accord with the lineage, intention in accord with the belief, a prayer that is a vow in accord with the intention, a course of conduct in accord with the prayer that is a vow, perseverance in accord with the course of conduct, duration in accord with perseverance, accumulation in accord with duration, achievement in accord with accumulation, a result in accord with the achievement, and the welfare of beings in accord with the result. 
“All dharmas”—
this indicates the diversity of suchness. 
“In all forms”— 
this indicates the nature of suchness. 
“Want to fully awaken”—
this indicates the intention to awaken fully. 
 There, the dharmas in “all dharmas” are two: imaginary dharmas and thoroughly established dharmas. “In all forms” has two aspects: conventional and ultimate. The full awakening in “want to fully awaken” has two aspects: a knower of all-knowledge and a knower of the knowledge of all aspects, which is to say, there is full awakening as a knower who knows all ordinary conventional aspects—all falsely imagined dharmas included in the three realms and included in the three periods of time. And there is full awakening as a knower who knows all aspects of the transcendental thoroughly established dharmas—nonarising, nonstopping, being calm from the beginning, being naturally in nirvāṇa, the intrinsic nature that is a nonexistent thing, and the liberations of emptiness and so on. Thus, it says “want to fully awaken… in all forms.” As for
“at the perfection of wisdom (prajñāpāramitā),”
because it has ultimately gone beyond (pāramitā) nine things (prayer, what has been undertaken by making an effort, the afflictions, karma, suffering, saṃsāra, conceptualization, good qualities, and the knowable), what is brought together in the nonconceptual vajra-like meditative stabilization, the transcendental knowledge (jñāna), is called perfection of wisdom. And, giving the name of the cause to the result, it teaches that the conceptual and nonconceptual mirror-like knowledge, the knowledge of sameness, discriminating knowledge, and the accomplishing knowledge attained subsequent to that are the perfection of wisdom,  because they are caused by it. 
The path knowledge of the worthy one included in the final śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels is also the concordant cause that is the perfection of wisdom, so it gets to be the perfection of wisdom.
Those knowledges, from the bodhisattva’s devoted course of conduct level up to the tenth Dharmameghā level, distinguished by increasing through the stages of listening, thinking, meditation, and so on; making the dharma-constituent stainless; being informed by method; entering into suchness as an omnipresent suchness, as the highest suchness, and so on; and, as actualization, causing the attainment of a special feature, the surpassing realization, on account of purified knowledge located on level after level having become bigger and bigger, also get the name perfection of wisdom.
Because they are the causes that bring about the realization distinguished by all the topics to do with the practice and realization of, and abiding in, the meditative stabilization on the final level that is just that [perfection of wisdom], that collection of words, collection of sentences, and collection of knowledges dedicated to Dharma teaching are also entitled perfection of wisdom. Thus, those Great Vehicle modes of explanation, to the extent that they directly teach just those aspects, are all the perfection of wisdom.
Thus, from among these that are presented as the perfection of wisdom, here the transcendental, nonconceptual wisdom included in the Buddha level is the perfection of wisdom.
 Therefore,
“should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom”
means “should make an effort at the absolutely pure perfection of wisdom completely free from all conceptualization.” 
 Some take the “perfection of wisdom” here  to be the Great Vehicle and say, [“make an effort at the perfection of wisdom”] means one should forsake the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles and “should make an effort at the Great Vehicle.” 
 Others say that when the “perfection of wisdom” there is taken as the knowledge of all aspects, understand a dative of purpose. Hence, it means “make an effort for the perfection of wisdom,” for the knowledge of all aspects. When nonconceptual wisdom or the Great Vehicle is called the “perfection of wisdom” at that time, understand the “at” as a locative.
 The effort in “make an effort at the perfection of wisdom” is threefold: an effort in training, effort in the course of conduct, and effort at accomplishing the final result. 
 There the effort in training is during the period of listening, thinking, and so on when it then says that they “should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom.” The effort in the course of conduct is during the practice period when it says below that they “should practice the perfection of wisdom.” And the effort at accomplishing the final result is during the realization period when it says below that they “make an effort.” The meaning of 
“should make”
is “it is proper to make,” or “it is right to make.” 
 Those three parts of the statement teach the three aspects: by whom an effort has to be made, for what it has to be made, and what has to be done. First, it is made by bodhisattvas, because those in the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles are not necessarily destined. It is made for just the perfection of wisdom because it is the root of all that has to be accomplished. The effort has to be done by continually understanding, respecting, and persevering at it and so on.
 Here there is a completely perfect result, completely perfect cause, and completely perfect preparation.  “Fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms” is the result; “the perfection of wisdom” is the cause; and “should make an effort” is the preparation. Just like “the stand” that has to be taken, “the achieving” that has to be done, and “the state of mind” one has to be in as explained in the Triśatikā, here too “wants to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms,” as a teaching about the completely perfect intention, teaches the stand; “should make an effort” teaches the achieving; and “at the perfection of wisdom,” insofar as it should be construed as the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom, teaches the state of mind one has to be in. 
 Having thus finished his brief explanation of the perfection of wisdom for those who understand by means of a brief indication, the Lord then fell completely silent. 
Explanation of the Intermediate Teaching
Brief teaching
Then the elder Śāriputra, for the sake of those who understand when there is an elaboration, starts the intermediate teaching with this question: 
“How then, Lord, should bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms make an effort at the perfection of wisdom?”
This is a fourfold question about the Dharma: What are “bodhisattva great beings”? What is “want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms”? What is “should make an effort at”? And what is “the perfection of wisdom”? Again, there will be an explanation of the four below in their appropriate context. 
Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord,
in his explanation, then gives a twofold exposition, brief and detailed. From,
“Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom by way of not taking their stand on it,” 
up to
“should cultivate… great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity,” 
brings together all dharmas and teaches by way of a brief exposition. Then, starting from just those dharmas, it gives a detailed exposition. 
“Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom by way of not taking their stand on it,”
and so on, teaches four practices, which is to say, the four practices taught by this:
“should… make an effort at the perfection of wisdom.”
They are
the practice of the nonconceptual perfections;practice in harmony with the dharmas on the side of awakening without the secondary afflictions;practice without harming that brings beings to maturity; andpractice without stains that brings the buddhadharmas to maturity. 
Among these, the practice of the perfections is accomplished with skillful means; the practice of the dharmas on the side of awakening is accomplished through knowledge of mastery; the practice of bringing beings to maturity is accomplished through compassion; and the practice of fully developing the buddhadharmas is accomplished with wisdom. 
 There, “having stood in the perfection of wisdom by way of not taking their stand on it” and so on teaches the practice of the perfections. From, 
“Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom, should perfect the four applications of mindfulness,”
and so on, up until
“they should perfect … the wishlessness meditative stabilization,”
teaches the practice of the dharmas on the side of awakening that is the absence of afflictions. From
“the four concentrations”
up until
“the nine abodes of beings”
teaches the practice without harming that brings beings to maturity. From
“they should perfect… the ten tathāgata  powers,”
and so on, up until
“great equanimity”
teaches the practice without stains that brings the buddhadharmas to maturity. 
Practice of the perfections
There, 
“having stood in the perfection of wisdom by way of not taking their stand on it,”
and so on, teaches the practice of the perfections. It teaches the practice of the perfections in three parts: standing, achieving, and the purity of the three spheres, just like “the stand” that has to be taken, “the achieving” that has to be done, and “the state of mind” one has to be in that is taught in the Triśatikā.
 When bodhisattvas have given up wanting a special result other than that; when, through the force of compassion, they intend to establish benefit and happiness for all beings; and when, through the force of wisdom, they stand nowhere at all in the three realms or in any dharma, bodhisattvas have “stood in the perfection of wisdom.” Hence it says bodhisattvas have “stood in the perfection of wisdom by way of not taking their stand on it.” It means “with the correct method of not taking a stand anywhere.” This intends that just not taking a stand anywhere is standing in the perfection of wisdom. Here it has taught that the “perfection of wisdom” is also the knowledge of all aspects, or nonconceptual wisdom, or the Great Vehicle. 
 The practice through the force of habit in harmony with the path to awakening is the achieving. Therefore it says a bodhisattva
“should complete the perfection of giving.”
 Ultimately, when dharmas have been sought, they are the purity of the three spheres; therefore, it says
“by way of not giving up anything, because a gift, a giver, and a recipient are not apprehended.”
 When bodhisattvas moved by compassion  give to all beings everything they want, it is simply called giving, but it is not the perfection of giving. When after giving, or after the giving of a gift, having made an investigation with the four ways of investigating and having comprehended properly with the four comprehensions they cause it to be cleansed with wisdom, at that time it has been well cleansed and it gets the name perfection. Bodhisattvas first do everything out of compassion and later clean it with wisdom, hence they practice with compassion and purify with wisdom—they purify intention with compassion and purify the endeavor with wisdom; they stand in the conventional and achieve with compassion, and endeavor, standing in the ultimate, with wisdom. With compassion all things are done for the sake of beings, so they are counted in the merit collection; with wisdom they are done for the sake of awakening, so they are counted in the wisdom collection. Therefore it says that bodhisattvas 
“should complete the perfection of giving by way of not giving up anything.”
In this regard, taking as the point of departure the fact that bodhisattvas standing on the first level realize suchness, ultimately abiding in suchness is by a direct vision when an investigation has been carried out, not otherwise.
Furthermore, no one can give or receive that suchness when a gift is given, so ultimately there is no “giving away” at all. Whatever food, drink, bedding, and so on are given away, they stand as falsely imagined dharmas, so, like a dream and like an illusion they do not exist. Hence this state, which is ultimately separated from the defining mark of giving, is called the “way of not giving up anything.” 
In this “way of not giving up anything” these three “are not apprehended”: the thing as “a gift,” I as a “giver,” and the one taking as a “recipient.” They are without the intrinsic nature of something that could be apprehended. The “because” is because the perfection of giving should be completed based on that, having taken that as its point of departure. 
 First, through the force of compassion they remain in the conventional mode by means of an ordinary course of practice and engage in giving. Then they remain in the ultimate mode governed by wisdom. When by means of an extraordinary course of practice all that has been investigated with wisdom cannot be apprehended, at that time the perfection of giving is named completed. Therefore, because they have not forsaken the two—first, the beings (sattva) who are the objective support of the production of the thought, and then awakening (bodhi)—they are endowed with all that the name bodhisattva signifies.
 In that case, since when a gift, a giver, and a recipient are not apprehended it totally precludes giving, how can this not be a contradiction? 
 It is because of the force of the perfection of skillful means. The perfection of skillful means is both compassion that grasps the conventional and wisdom that grasps the ultimate. They are companions that achieve and operate simultaneously, like the movement on dry land and movement in water engaged in by an amphibian. They totally preclude each other as different things it does but do not preclude each other as aspects of what it does. This teaches that up until awakening the practice achieving all the merit accumulations and wisdom accumulations is the “supreme benefit of awakening and beings.” These two will be explained again just as they are in the appropriate contexts. 
“Should complete the perfection of morality because no downfall is incurred and no compounded downfall is incurred”—
when bodhisattva householders  take up and follow the training to do with the bodhisattva code of conduct, and those gone forth to homelessness take up and follow the trainings to do with both codes of conduct, they incur no downfall. Even if they do incur a downfall, they do not compound it by letting time pass; they very quickly reveal it. Hence it says, “no downfall is incurred and no compounded downfall is incurred.” “Having stood in the perfection of wisdom” comes right after this as well so it should be understood that on account of not apprehending the three conceptualizations—“I am moral,” “this is morality,” “this is immorality”—it is the purity of the three spheres. Thus, below it will say,
“They do not falsely project ‘I am moral, this is morality, this is immorality.’ ” 
“Because there is no disturbance”—
this teaches the nature of the perfection of patience. Furthermore, governed by compassion they are not disturbed by beings, and governed by wisdom they realize there is no self in the volitional factors. Here also the purity of the three spheres on account of not apprehending patience, an object of patience, or malice will be explained again in the appropriate contexts.
“Because there is no relaxing of physical or mental effort”— 
this teaches engagement in the perfection of perseverance. It means bodhisattvas 
“should complete… the perfection of perseverance”
with the perseverance that causes them not to relax from any physical or mental effort at persisting, respecting, and trying hard. Not giving up, furthermore, is from wisdom and compassion. Here also the state of perfection is accomplished on account of not apprehending someone who has perseverence, perseverance, or laziness.
“Because there is no experience”—
if they enter into a concentration for their own sake  it becomes the “experience” of a concentration. So, given that bodhisattvas spurn all practice done only for their own sake as a sin, how could they ever pay attention to the experience of a concentration? What it means to say is that of the three concentrations—defiled, purified, and without outflows—they become absorbed in purified concentrations and concentrations without outflows, not in defiled ones. Here also, on account of not apprehending someone in the concentration, the concentration, or distraction, the perfection becomes complete.
“Because all phenomena are not apprehended”—
when they see just reality, they do not apprehend any ordinary, falsely imagined phenomena, and they do not even conceive of the extraordinary ones either, whereby they 
“should complete the perfection of wisdom.”
 How, standing in the perfection of wisdom, can they complete the perfection of wisdom? 
 When “the perfection of wisdom” is work at the knowledge of all aspects and the Great Vehicle there is no fault. Still, when bodhisattvas are working on the perfection of nonconceptual wisdom, thinking “ultimately there is no perfection of wisdom dharma whatsoever,” they stand in the perfection of nonconceptual wisdom, the nature of which is the absence of the conceptualization of the perfection of wisdom. At that point, the wisdom produced in a conventional form, which thinks “the three realms and so on are simply just suchness,” is conceptual in nature, but as the path of preparation realization, since it is informed by the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom, it is called the perfection of wisdom. Therefore there is no fault, because the intention is that bodhisattvas, standing in the perfection of wisdom, cultivate the perfection of wisdom. Here  too it should be understood that on account of not apprehending someone who has wisdom, wisdom, or intellectual confusion, it is the purity of the three spheres.
Practice of the dharmas on the side of awakening
Then, 
“Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom, should perfect the four applications of mindfulness,”
and so on, teaches the practice of the dharmas on the side of awakening. 
 Qualm: The cultivation of the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening is appropriate for those in the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles who strive for nirvāṇa but is not appropriate for bodhisattvas.
 Response: There is no fault here. Bodhisattvas want to realize all dharmas in all forms and are intent on not apprehending all dharmas, so, because they investigate whether the awakening dharmas do or do not exist ultimately, it is appropriate.
 Qualm: Nevertheless, in that case, having cultivated the dharmas on the side of awakening they become a cause for their actualizing nirvāṇa. Bodhisattvas therefore will become stream enterers, up to worthy ones. 
 Response: They are accomplished because of the power of the force of an earlier endeavor, so there is no fault in it. 
 Still, those who see faults in saṃsāra and feel repulsion, and strive for and accomplish nirvāṇa having seen its good qualities, effortlessly actualize nirvāṇa because of the force of an earlier endeavor, on account of the cause—their meditation on the applications of mindfulness. Bodhisattvas, however, regard saṃsāra and nirvāṇa equally. They are intent on producing benefit and happiness for all beings, so they see good qualities in saṃsāra because it is the cause for the benefit of beings, like nirvāṇa; and they see nirvāṇa as disagreeable, like saṃsāra, because it is not a place to stand to be of benefit to beings. They see them as equal  because they are both merely the true nature of dharmas. So they have meditated on the dharmas on the side of awakening in order to understand analytically that they cannot be apprehended. They do it simply to actualize the dharmas on the side of awakening. They do not work on them in order to realize the result of stream enterer and so on, or nirvāṇa. Just that is “knowledge of mastery.” It will also be explained like this in the teaching on the knowledge of mastery where it will say that
“they remain with the dharmas on the side of awakening, understanding that it is thus the time for mastery, and it is not the time for actualization.”
 There are four objects to which mindfulness is applied: body, feelings, mind, and dharmas. The four observations of those four are “the four applications of mindfulness.” Having come to know them previously, when bodhisattvas then search for them as they really are, they comprehend that body, feelings, mind, and dharmas, the mindfulness and wisdom focused on them, as well as the mental factor dharmas associated with them, are marked as falsely imagined, and they understand that they are not in fact real. Since the inexpressible ultimate is not within the range of either mindfulness or wisdom, the bodhisattvas realize that ultimately there are no defining marks of the applications of mindfulness, and thus stand in the perfection of wisdom and 
“perfect the four applications of mindfulness.”
Therefore the One Hundred Thousand also says
 “because the applications of mindfulness cannot be apprehended.”
I will give a detailed explanation of meditation on the dharmas on the side of awakening later as part of the exposition of the Great Vehicle.
 Construe the right efforts like this as well. It is saying that the defining marks  of the right efforts and so on are simply mere conventions, but ultimately the defining marks of the right efforts and so on have nonexistence for their intrinsic nature. Hence, understanding that the right efforts and so on have an intrinsic nature that cannot be apprehended, they, “having stood in the perfection of wisdom, … perfect” the dharmas on the side of awakening.
“They should cultivate the emptiness meditative stabilization.” 
The three doors to liberation cause the attainment of nirvāṇa  so they are in harmony with the cultivation of the dharmas on the side of awakening and are counted among the dharmas on the side of awakening. These are included in the bodhisattva stage so they are called “the three meditative stabilizations.”
 Among them, in regard to “the emptiness meditative stabilization,” that which is marked as the thoroughly established is empty of that which is marked as the falsely imagined. When it is cultivated as the empty aspect, “it is empty of those falsely imagined aspects,” and the mind has become single-pointed; this is “the emptiness meditative stabilization.” 
 Just that inexpressible ultimate, like space, separated from all the causal signs of form and so on, marked as the nonexistence of any aspect of a causal sign is the calming of all elaborations. When it is cultivated as the calm aspect, and the mind has become single-pointed, it is
“the signlessness meditative stabilization.” 
 Similarly, on account of seeing the three realms in their nonexistent intrinsic nature aspect, all dharmas come to be perceived as discordant. When the insight that they do not serve as a basis for anything to be wished for in the future has become a single-pointed mind, it is
“the wishlessness meditative stabilization.”
Practice without harming that brings beings to maturity
Then the practice that brings beings to maturity is taught with 
“they should cultivate the four concentrations,”
and so on. Those beings who are to be brought to maturity, furthermore, are ordinary beings and extraordinary beings, and the maturing has to be done with the dharmas in the concentration and meditative stabilization class, the clairvoyance class,  and the knowledge class, so it includes all three classes. That is presented as the practice that brings being to maturity because bodhisattvas first conventionally take up all the concentration dharmas, and so on, to work for the benefit of beings, then afterward, having searched for the ultimate, without settling down on the intrinsic nature of the concentrations, and so on, again with both compassion and skillful means take the conventional as their objective support and work for the benefit of beings. 
 There, in regard to the
“mindfulness of disgust,” 
having taken birth, decay, illness, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, depression, and grief; the impermanent, the empty, and the selfless and so on—the grounds for repulsion—as the objective support, seeing them as faults and paying attention to the feeling of disgust is “mindfulness of disgust.” As for a bodhisattva’s mindfulness of disgust, having seen that the foolish generate an awareness of all phenomena as having essences and engage with those even though they are selfless and are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the attention preceded by the thought that they may quickly come to know that is “mindfulness of disgust.” 
“Mindfulness of death”
is spoken of earlier governed by “mindfulness” as paying attention. Later, based on special insight, the vision of death in its true dharmic nature is said to be
“the perception of death.”
 The pleasure of not trusting any ordinary knowledge or craftsmanship, or the sixty-four arts and so on, is 
“the perception that there is no delight in the entire world.”
 Not wanting anything in the three realms on account of not seeing any reason to be attached to them is
“the perception that there is nothing to trust in the entire world.”
“They should cultivate knowledge of suffering.”
Having made known that all dharmas such as the aggregates and so on are, from a conventional perspective, just suffering,  then, even while knowing that they are ultimately utterly nonexistent things, in order to bring beings to maturity, knowing them conventionally in just the aspect of suffering and knowing how to make others understand them like that as well is the knowledge of suffering. Construe all the other noble truths similarly. 
 The knowledge that just those aggregates, constituents, sense fields, and so on are products, the knowledge of how to make that understood, and the knowledge that all are in agreement is 
“the knowledge of origination.”
 The knowledge that all their own and others’ afflictions, secondary afflictions, suffering, and existence are extinguished, and the knowledge of what causes them to be completely extinguished, is the bodhisattvas’
“knowledge of extinction.”
“[The] knowledge of not arising”
of bodhisattvas is the knowledge of all the arising in their own and others’ births in existence, and the knowledge of what causes them not to arise. 
“Knowledge of dharmas”
is direct knowledge of all dharmas as conventions, and, governed by the ultimate, knowledge as suchness.
“Subsequent realization knowledge”
is the inferential knowledge of all dharmas as conventions, the knowledge that even though they were not directly perceptible as impermanent, and so on, they are so, and the subsequent knowledge bodhisattvas have that all dharmas are in accord with emptiness.
 All the nobles’ knowledge of beings and pots and so on, and the bodhisattvas’ knowledge that observes all falsely imagined dharmas such as form and so on, is 
“conventional knowledge.”
“Knowledge of mastery”—
the knowledge with which bodhisattvas cultivate the three gateways to liberation—emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness,—and the dharmas on the side of awakening, without actualizing nirvāṇa,  the knowledge that causes only the habituation to and purification of them, is “knowledge of mastery.” Were they to actualize nirvāṇa they would become stream enterers and so on, but because they fear that, they do not touch the very limit of reality. With that knowledge they cultivate them as mere dharmas.
 Qualm: But how could they have cultivated dharmas that cause them to reach nirvāṇa and yet still not have actualized the very limit of reality? 
 As explained earlier, it is because they do not “pay attention to the feeling of disgust.” Furthermore, the precursor to the actualization of the very limit of reality is the cultivation of calm abiding and special insight. Bodhisattvas, however, do not practice a cultivation of such calm abiding and special insight that would cause them to reach the very limit of reality. Since theirs is only the vast cultivation of all dharmas without apprehending them, when they observe the dharmas on the side of awakening they understand them, unabsorbed, with an ordinary knowledge. Therefore, since they do not have the conditions for that calm abiding and special insight, they do not actualize the very limit of reality. Thus, later the Lord will again say,
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings contemplate emptiness furnished with the best of all aspects, they do not contemplate that they should actualize it; rather, they contemplate that they should master it. They contemplate that it is not the time it should be actualized, but rather it is the time it should be mastered. When not in actual meditative equipoise, bodhisattva great beings attach their minds to an objective support and without letting the dharmas on the side of awakening lessen, in the meantime do not actualize the extinction of outflows,”
and so on.
“Knowledge in accord with sound”— 
any language whatsoever is “in accord with sound.” Knowledge of that is “knowledge in accord with sound.” So, knowledge in accord with sound is the knowledge  with which bodhisattvas have an understanding and knowledge of all the languages and speech of hell beings, animals, ghosts, gods, humans, and Brahmās. 
 All of these are taken together with “having stood in the perfection of wisdom,” so understand that all are cultivated without taking any as a real basis. Therefore, the One Hundred Thousand and so on spell it out like that in every case. 
“The five undiminished clairvoyances”— 
because they are in possession of the five clairvoyances in all deaths and births in all forms of life, they have clairvoyances that do not decline, so they are “undiminished.”
“The six perfections”—
it is true that the six perfections have already been spoken about before, nevertheless here it speaks about them again in the context of bringing beings to maturity. 
“The six principles of being liked”—
these six principles are in the One Hundred Thousand. They are kindly physical action, kindly verbal action, kindly mental action, a balanced morality, a balanced view, and a balanced livelihood. 
“The seven riches” 
are faith, morality, learning, giving away, wisdom, a sense of shame, and a sense of compunction. 
“The eight ways great persons think”—
the ways śrāvakas think are as explained in the Subcommentary. As for the way bodhisattvas think, they think, “At some point may I be able to eliminate all the suffering of all beings”; they think, “At some point may I be able to establish in prosperity those who are suffering from poverty”; they think, “At some point may I be able to look after the needs of beings with the flesh and blood of my own body”; they think, “Even if I live long among the denizens of the hells may I at some point  only be of benefit to those beings”; they think, “With the ordinary and extraordinary endowments may I at some point come to see the hopes of the whole world fulfilled”; they think, “At some point, having become a buddha, may I deliver all beings from all the sufferings of saṃsāra”; they think, “In lifetime after lifetime may I never have a birth in which I am of no use to beings, a thought that is unconnected with the welfare of beings, a taste for the ultimate alone, meaningless words that do not satisfy all beings, a livelihood that does not benefit others, a body incapable of benefiting others, an awareness that does not illuminate what is of aid to others, wealth that is not used for the benefit of others, a position of importance in society that is not held for the sake of others, and a liking for causing harm to others”; and they think, “May all the results of evil deeds done by all other creatures come to fruition in me, and may all the results of my good conduct come to fruition in all beings.” These are “the eight ways great persons think.”
 When thinking in that way, they should meditate on 
“the nine places beings live”
so that those eight ways of thinking will bear fruit; so that, having viewed the world with compassion, they will bring about a benefit for others; so that, with wisdom, they will develop attention to not apprehending anything; and so that they will thoroughly understand the container world and its inhabitants. 
 Some say, “the nine things that cause anguish to beings.” Bodhisattvas are totally without “the nine things that cause anguish,” so they become the opposite, the nine things that cause no anguish at all.  Construe them this way: They are not caused anguish by the thought, “That one hurt me.” They are not caused anguish by the thought, “That one is hurting me.” They are not caused anguish by the thought, “That one will hurt me,” and so on.
Practice that brings the buddhadharmas to maturity
 After that, with 
“the ten tathāgata powers,” 
and so on, it teaches the practice that brings the buddhadharmas to maturity.
 Since it has taught the four immeasurables before in the context of bringing beings to maturity, in the context of the practices that bring the buddhadharmas to maturity it teaches them with the different names— 
“great compassion,”
and so on. 
Detailed Teaching
Having thus brought together all the dharmas and taught them in a brief exposition, now they have to be explained in detail. Earlier, by speaking about what has to be known by those “who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms,” it indicated the intention of bodhisattvas. Now, wanting to give a detailed teaching of the cause and result of that same intention, together with those who have the intention and so on, the Lord again, with those
“who want to fully awaken to the knowledge, furnished with the best of all aspects, of a knower of all aspects,”
and so on, gives a detailed teaching about the intention. 
Why bodhisattvas endeavor
Now the “why” taught previously, where it says in the exposition in eight parts “why bodhisattvas endeavor”—that “why” has to be explained.
 What stages does it have? The wanting of bodhisattvas refers to three things: 
they want to make themselves familiar with the three vehicles, they want the greatnesses of bodhisattvas, andthey want the greatnesses of buddhas. 
 The five parts of the statement, from
“who want to fully awaken to the knowledge, furnished with the best of all aspects, of a knower of all,”
up to
“who want to perfect all-knowledge,” 
teach the three vehicles and the result. From 
“who want to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva,”
up to
“bodhisattva great beings who want to establish them in the result of stream enterer, the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and in unsurpassed, perfect awakening should train in the perfection of wisdom,”
teaches the greatnesses of bodhisattvas. Then, from
“who want to train in the tathāgatas’ way of carrying themselves,”
up to
“make use of those five sorts of sense objects,”
teaches the greatnesses of buddhas. 
They want to make themselves familiar with the three vehicles
In regard to those [five], the “three knowledges” are the knowledge of all aspects, the knowledge of path aspects, and all-knowledge. 
 Among them, the extraordinary, nonconceptual knowledge included in the vajra-like meditative stabilization when there is a lord buddha’s transformation of the basis is called 
“the knowledge of all aspects.”
Knowledge in the form of the bodhisattva’s path—the practice of the perfections and so on—that emerges in a series of ten levels, bringing the bodhisattvas to accomplishment, is called 
“the knowledge of path aspects.”
The extraordinary path knowledge of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas that is caused by meditating on “everything compounded is impermanent,” “everything with outflows is suffering,” and “every dharma is selfless,” engaged with the aspects of impermanence and so on, is called 
“all-knowledge.”
The statement “who want to fully awaken to the knowledge, furnished with the best of all aspects, of a knower of all” teaches that they want to fully awaken to the knowledge of all aspects; 
“want to destroy all residual impressions, connections,  and afflictions”
teaches its result. 
 Qualm: But just that “want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms” has already taught the knowledge of all aspects, so why is it teaching it again?
 There is no fault, because the earlier “want to fully awaken to all dharmas” was teaching all the dharmas that have to be realized, but here, with “want to fully awaken to the knowledge of a knower of all,” it is teaching the full awakening to just that knowledge of a knower of all. 
 Qualm: What is its purpose in qualifying it with “furnished with the best of all aspects”? 
 There, the knowledge of a knower of all is threefold: the all-knowledge of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and the all-knowing knowledge of buddhas with all dharmas as its objective support. The nonconceptual all-knowing knowledge of buddhas is also called “the knowledge of a knower of all.” Were it just to have said “wants to fully awaken to the knowledge of a knower of all,” there would have been uncertainty about which knowledge it is referring to. Hence, it qualifies it with “furnished with the best of all aspects.” With that it teaches the “knowledge of a knower of all aspects.” 
 As for all the aspects, they are the nonarising unproduced aspect, the unceasing, the primordially calm, the naturally in nirvāṇa, the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, and so on. The best of all of those aspects, the principal one, is the emptiness aspect because it is the root of the other aspects. Therefore, it is taught that the entry into the sameness where the entities of apprehended and apprehender are the same, furnished with the best of all aspects and without conceptualization,  is the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. 
 Alternatively, the knowledge of a knower of all itself is being taught. All the aspects are then those aspects included in the collection of the wholesome, unwholesome, and neutral, as well as those included in the collection of those destined for what is right, destined for error, and those of uncertain destiny. In this case, a buddha’s knowledge of a knower of all is furnished with all aspects because it comprehends what is included in the collections of the unwholesome and neutral, as well as those destined for error and those of uncertain destiny. It is said to be “furnished with the best of all aspects” because it comprehends what is included in the collections of the wholesome and those destined for what is right. Those who want such an awakening are said to “want to fully awaken to the knowledge, furnished with the best of all aspects, of a knower of all”;
“want to destroy all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions”
teaches its result. Residual impressions of action, residual impressions of affliction, and residual impressions of birth are the three sorts of residual impressions; connections of action, connections of affliction, and connections of birth are the three sorts of connections, because the connections of dependent origination are three. The meaning is that they “want to destroy” all “residual impressions,” all “connections, and all “afflictions.” 
 Then the two—
“want to perfect the knowledge of path aspects”
and 
“want to perfect the knowledge of the aspects of the thought activity of all beings”—
teach the knowledge of path aspects and its result,  because bodhisattvas perfect the knowledge of the aspects of the paths and realize the thought and activity of beings, whereby they accomplish the welfare of beings. 
 Then, “[they] want to perfect all-knowledge” teaches the knowledge of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, because, even though bodhisattvas have not actualized all-knowledge, for the sake of beings they know the nature of all-knowledge and the causes for attaining all-knowledge, and they establish beings in their respective results of stream enterer and so on. With that, therefore, they will have perfected all-knowledge. The conditions that aid all-knowledge are not taught because bodhisattvas will know what they are from just this, so it is unnecessary.
They want the greatnesses of bodhisattvas
Then, 
“want to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva”
and so on teaches the desire for the greatnesses of bodhisattvas. Furthermore, it teaches four qualities of bodhisattvas: qualities of the impure levels, qualities of the pure levels, qualities of the level of detailed and thorough knowledge, and qualities when standing on the final level. 
 From the first to the seventh level are the impure levels because bodhisattvas make an active effort to pay attention there. There you should know their qualities are from “want to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva” up to
“want to thoroughly establish a buddha’s body.”
The qualities of the eighth level are from “want to thoroughly establish a buddha’s body” up to
“comprehend the suchness of all dharmas.”
The qualities of the level of detailed and thorough knowledge, on the ninth level, are from
“tiny particles”
up to the perfecting of the six perfections, and the qualities when standing on the final tenth level are from
“want to acquire the buddha qualities of the past, future, and present lord buddhas”
up to the establishing of beings in their respective results of stream enterer and so on. 
 Among these is 
“want to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva”—
turning away from the state of a śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha is called “the secure state of a bodhisattva.” Others say to take “flawlessness” as the tathāgata­garbha. In regard to that there are three periods: flawlessness that is the absence of defilement, the secure state of a bodhisattva, and the certification of dharmas. As for the tathāgata­garbha, there are also three periods for that tathatā (“suchness”): the impure period in ordinary foolish beings, the period on the pure and impure bodhisattva levels, and the pure period on the Tathāgata level. There, the impure suchness is called “a being” (sattva). It is also called “the fixed state of defilement.” In the pure and impure period it is called “awakening and being” (bodhisattva) because the awakening (bodhi) period is pure, and the being (sattva) period impure. Just that is called “the secure state of a bodhisattva.” In the pure period it is called the tathāgata because it said,
 “Tathāgata, Subhūti, is a word for perfect suchness.”
Just that is called “the certification of dharmas.”
 The period when a bodhisattva has forsaken the impure, fixed state of defilement period (when the tathāgata­garbha is called “being”), and reached the pure and impure  “secure state of a bodhisattva” period (when it is called “awakening and being”), is “the secure state of a bodhisattva.” Hence it means they “want” to reach the period of “the secure state of” reality called bodhisattva (“awakening and being”).
“Who want to pass beyond the level of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas”—
this is because the qualities are superior, because a bodhisattva who has set out for the knowledge on the bodhisattva levels passes beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels on account of four qualities: special faculties, special accomplishment, special knowledge, and special result. 
 There a śrāvaka has naturally dull faculties, a pratyekabuddha middling faculties, and a bodhisattva sharp faculties. Śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas naturally seek their own welfare, accomplish their own welfare, and complete benefits only for themselves. Bodhisattvas naturally seek their own and others’ welfare, accomplish their own and others’ welfare, and complete benefits for themselves and others. Śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas realize that dharmas are impermanent, suffering, empty, and selfless, while bodhisattvas who have set out to benefit themselves and others are skilled in all fields of knowledge, and, having established the many dispositions, aims, and mental states of beings, make them realize that all dharmas are characterized by being unfindable. Śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas gain the purification of afflicted obscurations and reach a nirvāṇa with no remaining aggregates, while bodhisattvas eliminate both afflicted obscurations and knowledge obscurations and establish themselves in a nonabiding nirvāṇa, looking after the welfare of beings until the end of saṃsāra. 
“Who want to stand on the irreversible level”—
there are four reasons why those who have produced the thought of awakening later turn back from the thought of awakening: because they are no longer in the lineage, or have gotten into the clutches of bad friends, or have weak compassion, or are scared of the extremely long and unbearable sufferings of saṃsāra. All four of those causes, furthermore, are absent from bodhisattvas who have entered onto the bodhisattva levels. Therefore, the levels of Pramuditā and so on are called the irreversible levels.
“Who want to surpass gift-giving to all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing”—
the thought of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas when engaged in charity is not pure because it has craving, has conceptualization, and results in existence or in functioning for one’s own welfare. The bodhisattvas’ rejoicing thought is without craving, without conceptualization, does not have causal signs within its range, and is of benefit to self and others, so it is superior because of those qualities and hence is surpassing. 
 Construe 
“the aggregate of morality”
and so on in the same way as well.
 In
“for the sake of all beings… giving even a little gift,”
“for the sake of all beings” says that it is for all beings; “a little gift” is because of not having many things. It becomes immeasurable and incalculable because of turning it over for the sake of all beings, because of turning it over to all-knowledge, and because of the purity of the three spheres. 
“Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving should train in the perfection of wisdom”—
giving and so on without having trained in the Great Vehicle achievement is not the ultimate perfection.
“Who want to thoroughly establish a buddha’s body”—
on the seventh level  they know the form of the body of a buddha but at that time cannot achieve it. Having understood the form of the body of a buddha on that level they generate the desire to achieve it. Thus, it is saying that they enter into the intrinsic nature dharma body of all the buddhas from the tenth level; they also achieve the fine ornaments (the major marks and minor signs adorning the form body); and they cause the admiration of the tathāgata who is separated from speech, sound, and language, inexpressible, and naturally calm. Hence it teaches the three bodies. 
“Who want to be born in the buddha’s lineage”—
here, take the tathāgata’s lineage to be the thoroughly established suchness, because at the eighth level all conceptualization, all exertion, and all causal signs are cut off, and there has been the transformation into the nature of purified suchness. This is called being “born in the tathāgata’s lineage.”
“The heir apparent’s level”
is just that very eighth level. Thus it says, “because it is totally without basic immorality it is called the heir apparent’s level.”
 Take
“a world as vast as the dharma-constituent”
as the world in the sense of beings, because the world as beings is also without an end. It has the tathāgata­garbha as its terminus. The world that is 
“as far-reaching as the space element”
is the world as container.
“Want to make a single wholesome thought of awakening inexhaustible”—
it is inexhaustible just like a single drop of water poured into the ocean that does not run out because, dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects, it works for the welfare of beings until the end of saṃsāra. Also understand the inexhaustible as it is explained in The Teaching of Akṣayamati.
“Want to ensure the line of buddhas will be unbroken”
means to ensure the progeny necessary to continue the unbroken line, so that the line of buddhas  will remain unbroken. 
“[They] want to stand in inner emptiness”
and so on teaches the sixteen emptinesses. It is true that emptiness, as an entity, is simply one. Nevertheless, it is divided into many types because of the different minds and interests of bodhisattvas. 
 Here, when bodhisattvas endeavor to pay attention to emptiness, they think, “If all dharmas are empty—that is, unreal—how does the ‘self’ in ‘Monks, I am my own master’; ‘The actions I did myself ripen in me’; ‘Stay by yourself in the form of an island’ and so on exist?” Having reflected on that, when they first take up in their mind these forms, feelings, and so on that are their own self’s inner dharmas and reflect on them, they perfectly review the fact that there is nothing that can be set forth as a “self” that ultimately exists. These are simply things set forth just conventionally; they are names plucked out of thin air. Hence, it says “inner emptiness.” This is teaching the aggregates as emptiness.
 Then the bodhisattvas reflect, “If there is no self, does anything else exist or not?” They do not see any other things that can be set forth as “something else,” but see them simply as mere sense fields. Hence, it says
“outer emptiness.”
This teaches that the sense fields are emptiness.
 Then, again in order to determine just that meaning well, they take up in their mind the inner and outer dharmas as one and meditate on them, viewing them simply as just the eighteen constituents. Therefore, it says
“inner and outer emptiness,”
which teaches that the constituents are emptiness.
 Alternatively, tīrthikas say, “The enjoyer is the soul,” so it is necessary to teach the absence of a self of persons. And still those who have set out in this Dharma say, “The enjoyer is the inner sense fields,”  so it is necessary to teach that the sense fields are not real things. Hence it makes a presentation of inner and outer emptiness for both of those. 
 There it teaches inner emptiness based on the person not having a self, with “the eyes are empty of self and what belongs to self, and the ears… are empty of self and what belongs to self,” and so on; and it teaches inner emptiness based on the selflessness of dharmas with “the eyes are empty of eyes…, the ears are empty of ears,” and so on. Both explanations are given. 
 In this regard, there are also four possibilities to do with the eye: “my eyes are me”; “I have eyes”; “I am where my eyes are”; “my eyes are where I am.” This is similar to considering, “form is me”; “I have form”; “I am where form is”; and “form is where I am.” Among these, “my eyes are me” is grasping at the eyes as the self. “I have eyes”; “I am where my eyes are”; and “my eyes are where I am” is grasping at the eyes as belonging to the self. There, the understanding in accord with the reality of the eyes in a form that cannot be apprehended eliminates those four ways of grasping and perfectly sees in accord with the reality that the eyes are empty of self and what belongs to self. Similarly, connect this with the ears and so on as well. This is instruction in emptiness based on the selflessness of persons. 
 Based on the selflessness of dharmas, eyes have the three aspects of the falsely imagined eyes, the conceptualized eyes, and the true dharmic nature of the eyes. Among these, the falsely imagined eyes are the things taken to be the eyes that are in the form of expressed and expressor. The conceptualized eyes are the appearance of eyes in the specific form in which they exist as a subject and object entity.  The true dharmic nature of the eyes is the nature free from expressed and expressor, that is inexpressible, that is free from becoming something with an appearance, and is a thoroughly established private introspective knowledge. 
 There, in “the eyes are empty of eyes,” “the eyes” are the true dharmic nature of the eyes; they are “empty,” separated from “eyes,” the falsely imagined and the conceptualized eyes. That is the meaning. Similarly, connect this with “the ears are empty of ears” and so on. 
 Qualm: The inexpressible ultimate is not an intrinsic nature of the eyes. Were it an intrinsic nature of the eyes it would be expressible, so why is it called the “true dharmic nature of the eyes”? 
 That is true, but still, even though any compounded phenomena whatsoever—eyes and so on, a shape or a sound and so on—in the way they are when transformed, in their thoroughly established form, are not differentiated as separate and are in the same form, nevertheless, when you want to talk about them you have no choice except to make distinctions in order to give an explanation. They are merely indicated by specifically distinguishing them with words like “the shape’s suchness,” “the sound’s suchness,” “the smell’s suchness,” and so on. But that suchness is not in those forms and does not become expressible as them. Thus, all the true dharmic natures of the eyes and so on are devoid of intrinsic natures of the inner eye sense field and so on, and hence it says “inner emptiness.”
 Having thus stopped grasping at an inner entity as an enjoyer, to stop grasping at outer entities as the enjoyed there is a presentation of outer emptiness. Tīrthikas grasp shapes and so on as the enjoyed, viewing them as what belongs to self; followers of this Dharma grasp them conceptually as just objects. To stop the former of these it says “a form is empty of self and what belongs to self,” “a sound is empty of self and what belongs to self,” and so on.  To stop the other of the two it says “a form is empty of a form,” “a sound is empty of a sound,” and so on. Again, you should construe that as above. Similarly, about outer objects devoid of self and what belongs to self, devoid of those falsely imagined dharma aspects, it says “outer emptiness.” 
 Having thus given an explanation of the conceptualizations of inner and outer enjoyer and enjoyed, now, to eliminate from the bodies of assembled inner and outer sense fields the view of “I” and “mine,” and the conceptualization of them as a body, it collects them both together and teaches 
“inner and outer emptiness.”
In order to eliminate views, bodhisattvas correctly view those assemblages of inner and outer sense fields as empty of a real “I” and “mine.” The presentation of the elimination of the conceptualization, furthermore, is based on there being no collections of the assemblages, because, contingent one on the other, they are empty of functioning. This means that the eyes are empty of a shape, so ultimately they do not perform the action of seeing and so on, having connected with it. Similarly, a shape is empty of the eyes in the sense that it does not perform a function together with them. Similarly, the ears are empty of a sound, and a sound is empty of the ears. Therefore, because the collection does not function, the conceptualization of the assemblage as a body is eliminated. 
 In the section explaining the emptinesses, therefore, the inner dharmas are empty of the outer dharmas, and the outer dharmas are empty of the inner dharmas. 
 What does inner dharmas empty of outer dharmas mean? It means that the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the thinking mind are empty of shapes, sounds, smells, tastes, feelings, and dharmas. Thus there is no “I” and “mine” in the assemblage of inner and outer dharmas. And the inner dharmas are devoid of the outer dharmas,  and the outer dharmas are devoid of the inner dharmas, so, because in the absence of an assemblage they are ultimately empty of functioning, it says “inner and outer emptiness.”
 After perfectly setting forth the three emptinesses, bodhisattvas reflect, “Does ‘emptiness’ exist as an aspect of a phenomenon or not? If an ‘emptiness’ exists then emptiness exists, and the state of not being empty will come to exist as well, because the existence of an antidote without the existence of its opposition is untenable. And if there is a nonempty state, then that will be the nonempty state that all dharmas are in.” Having reflected thus, bodhisattvas then decide, “There is no ‘emptiness’ at all. Were some other ‘empty’ dharma to exist, then a nonempty dharma would exist, so there is no other ‘empty’ dharma at all.” 
 To illustrate, someone “sees” the city of the gandharvas and thinks they have seen it. Then, afterward, when they have really explored and looked for just that city and do not see it, they no longer think that they have seen it. But it is not suitable to say, when they see its emptiness, because they think it is empty that there is some other, different entity—the “emptiness” of the city they were thinking about. Similarly, taking a falsely imagined shape and so on as a real shape, they think they have seen a constituent element of reality. Then when they look into what it really is, because the knowledge of it as it really is does not see that constituent of reality when it is looked for, it is simply that the nonexistence of the intellectually active awareness of the constituent of reality and an intellectually active awareness of the empty is born. But it is not suitable to say that when they see it is empty that there is some other, different constituent of reality—“the empty”—there. Therefore, because emptiness does not exist, the nonempty state does not exist either; because the nonempty state does not exist, emptiness does not exist either. This is the correct explanation here. What you should not say is, “There is no emptiness,”  because all dharmas are empty. And you should not say, “Emptiness exists!” because when you investigate, there is no other dharma—“emptiness”—at all. So this is the
“emptiness of emptiness.”
 Again, bodhisattvas think, “If all dharmas are empty, why are all these moving and unmoving states of existence called ‘dependent origination.’ If they do not exist, they cannot be a dependent origination. And if a dependently originated phenomenon does exist, in that case all the moving and unmoving states of existence exist.” Having thought that, they determine there are no “dependently originated phenomena” at all, but even though they are thus totally nonexistent, still, from a time without beginning, for as long as they are not perfectly seen and directly realized they remain as existent causes and effects in the form of action, affliction, and maturation. And yet those actions, afflictions and maturations are emptinesses in each and every way. Those empty phenomena that exist as emptinesses in the form of causes and effects are dependent originations.
 To illustrate, a certain magician, having deceived the eyes of beings with an abracadabra, conjures up the appearance of a real elephant, horse, chariot, small troop of soldiers, mountain, waterfall, ocean, and so on. 
 That becomes the condition that produces in a being whose eyes have been deceived by the abracadabra a consciousness of an elephant and so on appearing as that object, and those with those consciousnesses see those magically produced elephants and so on. Such a cause-and-effect reality existing as the magically produced elephant and so on, along with the consciousness,  is the dependent origination. The dependent origination that is those magically produced elephants and so on, and those consciousnesses, cannot possibly exist ultimately. 
 Similarly, all fools whose sight has been deceived by ignorance see karmically constructed, falsely imagined phenomena that are like the magically produced elephants and so on. Those falsely imagined phenomena become the condition that generates a consciousness that they are appearing as they are, and those with those consciousnesses see those phenomena. Those grasped-object phenomena and grasper-subject phenomena imagined like that, existing in the form of causes and effects, are dependent originations. Those grasped-grasper dependent originations cannot possibly exist ultimately, therefore 
“all dharmas have no intrinsic nature.”
Were phenomena to have any unfabricated essential identity in the form of an intrinsic nature, they would not come forth, contingent on something else, in a form that arises under the power of causes and conditions. But phenomena do come forth as dependent phenomena, dependent on other conditions; they do not come forth through an intrinsic nature that is their own unfabricated being. Hence it should be known that they are not things with their own intrinsic nature. Because their own intrinsic nature is thus nonexistent, therefore they “lack an intrinsic nature.” Just because they lack an intrinsic nature, they are emptiness. Hence, “the meaning of no intrinsic nature is the meaning of dependent origination, and the meaning of emptiness is the meaning of dependent origination.” 
 When the perfect sight of reality has been produced and has overcome the force of abracadabra-like ignorance, falsely imagined dharmas like the magically produced elephant and so on, and the consciousness-dharmas that grasp them  in the form of a dependent origination marked as a cause-and-effect reality, stop appearing and disappear. This is the 
“great emptiness.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “If all dharmas are empty, the ultimate dharma is empty too. If it is empty, how is it ultimate? How does the vajropama meditative stabilization of the buddhas apprehend it? If that dharma does exist, then all dharmas will similarly exist as well.” They then determine as follows: No “ultimate” dharma exists at all. The tathāgata­garbha in its established state is not the nature of the dharmas, because you cannot say it “exists” or “does not exist.” You cannot say this thoroughly established state “exists” because it is presented as being characterized by the nonexistence of both the falsely imagined grasped-object and grasper-subject, and you cannot say of something characterized by nonexistence that it “exists.” You cannot say it is “nonexistent” either, because it exists as an intrinsic nature separated from duality. If you say that in such a form it “exists,” it comes to exist as a real thing and becomes the extreme of over-reification; and if you say it does not exist as a substantial reality, it becomes nonexistent like a rabbit’s horns and so on and becomes the extreme of over-negation. So, since it is inexpressible as either, it should not be conceived of like that. 
 And the statement that the vajropama meditative stabilization apprehends it is an ill-considered statement, because the extraordinary nonconceptual knowledge of the buddhas does not apprehend anything. At that time it has no grasped-object and grasper-subject aspects, so there has been a transformation into an absolutely pure state and hence it does not apprehend anything. But still, because of the earlier  habituation to being a grasper-subject in a saṃsāra that has no beginning, even though at that time it is not in the nature of a consciousness and has no grasped-object of its own, still it is labeled as itself operating like a grasper-subject. It is said to be “equal” because it is equally an apprehended and apprehender entity. It is said to be “equal to the equal” because it is just that apprehended and apprehender as well. Ultimate reality in such a form, not existing in the form of some other phenomenon, is the 
“emptiness of ultimate reality.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “If all phenomena are emptiness, compounded phenomena and uncompounded phenomena would not exist, but it is not right to say that they ‘do not exist’ because they are expressed as the compounded and uncompounded, and also from time to time in the scriptures they are impure appearance.” They then determine as follows: No transformed “compounded” phenomenon exists at all. Were it to exist, it would not be correct that it is in fact “compounded,” because the compounded is taken to be something made from a collection of causes and conditions that come together. If some compounded phenomenon were to exist ultimately, it would have been made by something else, and nothing can make an ultimate dharma. Since such a “compounded” phenomenon does not exist at all, it is fools using such names, because of a falsely imagined transformation. The arising, lasting, and perishing that are the characteristic marks of compounded things also have an imagined existence. Since the characteristic marks are said to have an imagined existence, the bearer of the marks definitely has to be taken as having an imagined existence as well. It is not right to characterize an ultimate dharma as imaginary. And even if a “compounded phenomenon” ultimately exists, it is not right for one phenomenon to have the three characteristic marks. Therefore  this is the 
“emptiness of the compounded.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “Those uncompounded phenomena that are empty on account of the compounded being compounded are not compounded things. They are therefore the ultimate nature.” They then determine as follows: No transformed “uncompounded” phenomenon exists at all. The “uncompounded” is taken to be the nonexistence of something compounded. It does not ultimately exist. It is similar to space, which is taken to be marked by the nonexistence of anything compounded. It does not exist marked as a discrete entity absolutely other than that. An analytic cessation is also marked just by the nonexistence of any compounded phenomenon. Similarly, a nonanalytic cessation is also marked by the destruction of compounded phenomena. If even in the śrāvaka system they do not ultimately exist, it goes without saying that they do not do so in the emptiness system. This realization that they are emptiness is the 
“emptiness of the uncompounded.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “If all dharmas are empty, is it right that we find in the scriptures statements that the lord buddhas are omniscient because they know those ‘past dharmas’ at the prior limit, ‘future dharmas’ at the later limit, and ‘present dharmas’ at the midpoint; that those lord buddhas’ knowledge of ‘the past free from unobstruction’ and so on is ‘a distinct attribute of a buddha’; and that the ‘divine eye’ and so on cover the three time periods?” They then determine as follows: It is not right that “prior limit, later limit, and the midpoint” dharmas exist at all, because  one single dharma cannot be said to be three, “future, present, and past.” If it is an ultimate dharma it is said to be just one. How could it be tenable that it is also at three times? The description of it in terms of three times is not right because then, whereas it is just one, at the later limit it would have to be the future, in between it would be the present, and at the prior limit it would be the past. So, since that is the case, it is just one.
 To illustrate, the first month Citrā, which has gone into a mansion and has emerged from a mansion, is still one. This happens without it changing. 
 Furthermore, is this time contingently established or is it established in and of itself? 
 It is not right to say that it is established in and of itself, because it is feasible that things that stand still are established in and of themselves, but it is not feasible if they do not stand still. Time does not stand still. Its mode of operating is as something that is an instant, half a second, a second, a day and night, a fortnight, a month, the days in a month marking changes in constellation, a season, a yearly cycle, a time period, and so on. So time does not stand still even for an instant. It is labeled a half second when a bit of the past and a bit of the future are combined into one. Similarly, past and future combined together into one are labeled a day and a night. Therefore, a time “established in and of itself” does not exist in the past, the future, or the present, which are things that do not stand still. 
 Even if you say that time is contingently established, and contingent on the past there is a future and present, and similarly, contingent on the present there are the other two times, and so on, if the two times—the present and the future—exist contingent on the past, then, when it is the past, the present and the future will be there as well.  If both the present and the future are not there in the past, they are not contingent on it. If both present and future are there in the past, since they are both there, they are both the past. Similarly, if the two—the present and the past—are contingent on the future, both the present and the past will be there in the future, and if they are not there they will not be contingent on it. If those two are there in the future, then they both become the future as well. Similarly, if the two—the past and the future—are contingent on the present, both the past and the future will be here in the present, and if they are not here, they will not be contingent on it. And if those two, the past and the future, are here at the present time, then they are both here and are therefore both the present as well. 
 Therefore, time is still just one. 
 So, they think in these and other ways that ultimately no “prior limit, later limit, or the midpoint” dharmas exist at all. The Lord teaches that they are ordinary conventions. This is the 
“emptiness of what transcends limits.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “If all dharmas are empty, how could the Lord have said saṃsāra does exist: ‘Saṃsāra is long for fools’; ‘Bhikṣus, this saṃsāra has no beginning or end’? Thus, he did say it exists, and since it does, those who are in saṃsāra exist, and based on that, therefore, all dharmas exist as well.” They then determine as follows: There is no dharma called saṃsāra at all. And why? Because it “has no beginning or end.” Were there to be a dharma called saṃsāra, its beginning  would exist and its end would exist. No dharma with a beginning and end is to be seen at all. And the lord has said, “No prior limit appears.”
 If you say both a beginning and an end have been refuted but a middle has not been refuted, so a middle exists, that is not right, because how could there be a middle of something that does not have a beginning or an end? A “middle” exists contingent on a beginning and an end. 
 But why, if there is no dharma called saṃsāra in some other form in which beings are going through life after life, did the Lord say, “Bhikṣus! This saṃsāra has no beginning and no end because no beginning limit appears. Beings obscured by ignorance and bound by craving wander in saṃsāra”?
 Again, the response is as follows: Being in saṃsāra is itself ultimately not tenable. If somebody is in saṃsāra, is the saṃsāra to be counted as permanent or impermanent? If it is permanent, it is not feasible that somebody is in saṃsāra, because it would be unchanging. Even if it is impermanent, it is not feasible that somebody is in saṃsāra, because each of the instants have perished and are no longer what they were, and the second instant arises as something quite other, so how could there be a saṃsāra there? Hence saṃsāra is the label given to the unbroken flow of compounded phenomena existing as an extended series of productions and cessations. This is the 
“emptiness of no beginning and no end.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “Even though saṃsāra cannot be apprehended, when dharmas have been transformed, ‘nirvāṇa’ exists. You cannot say the truth of cessation does not exist because the Lord has explicitly taught it with, ‘Bhikṣus, the unproduced, unmade, unoriginated, uncompounded exists,’ and so on. Hence nonrepudiation exists.” Take “the repudiated”  as the five aggregates, because they are to be repudiated and they are to be made nonexistent. In the sacred words of the Tathāgata Kāśyapa the label the repudiated is given to the five aggregates. And now as well “the one suffering existence to be repudiated” and “the five suffering existences to be repudiated” are explained. The thing to be repudiated not being there is called nonrepudiation. Where the aggregates will have stopped is called nonrepudiation. Hence it is cessation.
 The bodhisattvas then determine as follows: It is not correct that there is any “nonrepudiation” phenomenon at all. The nonexistence of the aggregates is nonrepudiation, and that nonexistence of the aggregates is the nirvāṇa without any aggregates remaining, characterized as the nonexistence of everything. So you cannot make a presentation of it in any way in the form of some other phenomenon. Hence the expression nonexistent thing is an expression synonymous with nirvāṇa, cessation, all compounded phenomena at peace, nonrepudiation, and so on. 
 But if nirvāṇa does not exist how will compounded phenomena not arise? Therefore, the dharma that counteracts the recurrence of compounded phenomena is nirvāṇa.
 That is not tenable either. How could there ever be compounded phenomena that have passed into nirvāṇa? If compounded phenomena do pass into nirvāṇa, it must be reckoned some permanent or impermanent thing is passing into nirvāṇa. If you say “something permanent is passing into nirvāṇa,” that is untenable. Something permanent never changes, and there is no need for it to pass into nirvāṇa. 
 If you say “something impermanent is passing into nirvāṇa,” it would be impermanent; therefore, since it would have been destroyed it would not arise again. And passing into nirvāṇa does nothing to an entity that does not arise. And even if you say that nirvāṇa acts to counteract the other compounded phenomena that are the cause of its arising, they are also not there.  It is the fire of the extraordinary path that burns the seed of the tree of ignorance into an entity that will not arise again. Not arising in its nature—that is labeled nirvāṇa. And if even in the śrāvaka system there is no “nirvāṇa” at all in the form of some other dharma, it goes without saying there is none in the emptiness system. This realization is the 
“emptiness of nonrepudiation.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “If all attributes are empty it is untenable that, based on the behaviors and thoughts, instincts, interests, dispositions, and personality types— needy and so on—constituting the basic nature of beings, the knowledge of various dispositions, the knowledge of various interests, the knowledge of various basic personalities and so on that are the special attributes of a buddha become operational attributes. Therefore, those attributes of a basic nature ultimately exist.” 
 The bodhisattvas then determine as follows: It is not right to describe them as attributes like that in the form of something quite other, because they are particular periods in a being’s continuum. They cannot be established as different or not different from the beings. Therefore this—thinking that such hypostatized attributes do not exist—is the 
“emptiness of a basic nature.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “If all things are nonexistent, how can those attributes of them—impermanence, suffering, selflessness, and so on—exist? It is impossible to have an attribute without an attribute possessor. Thus, all compounded things are impermanent; all things with outflows are suffering; all things are selfless, and when that perfect knowledge of reality is seen and attained,  freedom from the suffering of all existences is established.”
 The bodhisattvas then determine as follows: The impermanence attribute and so on cannot be the ultimate attribute. How could an ultimate attribute be impermanent, arise, and be destroyed? An attribute that changes and transforms cannot be an “ultimate.” Just that which is true, that which is unmistaken, is their ultimate. Therefore the ultimate does not change and nothing inheres in it.
Similarly, if an attribute in the form of suffering that serves as an ultimate were to exist then suffering would be permanent. And in that case, because the permanent suffering would always be there, ordinary or extraordinary happiness would never arise again. 
Similarly, if a “selfless” attribute existed as the ultimate then selflessness would inhere in all things and they would become permanent. And were they to have become so, “liberation” would not be a state to be accomplished. Therefore, these basic natures of imaginary phenomena are just imaginary. The emptiness of all dharmas is not something that can be examined. Hence this is the 
“emptiness of all dharmas.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “Even if, for the time being, impermanence and so on do not, as general characterizing marks, exist, still those marks particular to something—‘easily breakable,’ ‘seeable’ that is the mark of a form or physical object, ‘experience’ that is the mark of feeling, and so on—do exist. Since they exist, form and so on also exist.” 
 They then determine as follows: Are these marks different from the bases of the marks or not different? If they are not different, it is not correct that “just that is the mark, and just that is the basis of the marks,” because if the basis of a mark is not established,  the mark is not different than that and hence is not established. How could it be established as its mark?
 If they are different, then the following investigation has to be pursued: Does the mark exist before the basis of the mark, or does it come about afterward, or are they there at the same time? 
 If the mark is there before the basis of the mark, then of what, in the absence of the basis of the mark, is it the mark? If just a mark without a basis exists there before, then later on it will be without a basis as well. 
 If the basis of the mark is there before and the mark comes about later, in that case the basis of the mark comes about without a mark before the mark is there, so why would it not be without a mark afterward as well? If the basis of the mark without a mark is already there before, later when it gets the mark, having come about without cause that mark will serve no function at all. 
 If the basis of the mark and the mark have come about at the same time, then that is a new discovery indeed—a basis of the mark that is different from the mark, and a mark that is different from the basis of the mark. So how could the bifurcation “this is the mark; this is the basis of the mark” be right? Therefore, the marks of imaginary dharmas are just falsely imagined, and hence unable to bear ultimate scrutiny. This is the 
“emptiness of its own mark.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “If all attributes cannot be apprehended, in that case an attribute that cannot be apprehended in the form of something quite other would exist. If that which cannot be apprehended is taken to be nonexistent then all attributes can be apprehended. Therefore, what cannot be apprehended does exist.” 
 They then determine as follows: It is not correct that an attribute that cannot be apprehended in the form of something quite other exists. If the attribute called “cannot be apprehended” in the form of something quite other exists,  an apprehending apart from that which cannot be apprehended would also exist. On account of that, that which cannot be apprehended would become an apprehended entity. And that is unsuitable because it stands negated—to be itself apprehended and to be itself something that cannot be apprehended is a contradiction. And even if it is thought, in regard to what cannot be apprehended, that apprehending is not there, in that case what cannot be apprehended also, because it cannot be apprehended, is just nonexistent. Therefore there is no apprehending of “an attribute that ‘cannot be apprehended’ in the form of something quite other exists”; rather, given the fact that attributes cannot be apprehended, that is merely labeling “it cannot be apprehended” onto this or that. Therefore, this is the 
“emptiness of not apprehending.”
 Again, the bodhisattvas think, “It has been explained that
“all dharmas are in their intrinsic nature nonexistent things,”
so the intrinsic nature of a ‘nonexistent thing’ as it pertains to every dharma has to be searched for. Therefore, because it is established as being in its intrinsic nature a nonexistent thing, a dharma ‘in its intrinsic nature a nonexistent thing’ exists. But if it is thought, ‘If dharmas are things that are nonexistent in their nature, then one would be saying “dharmas do not exist,” and what gain would there be in that?’ it is not so. There is a great gain because, when it has been accepted that ‘all falsely imagined dharmas are nonexistent in each and every way,’ it is being said that just those falsely imagined dharmas are there as the intrinsic nature of nonexistent things, so it becomes an explanation of the existence of one side of dharmas.”
 They then determine as follows: What is the meaning of this statement, “all dharmas are in their intrinsic nature nonexistent things”? This “all dharmas” teaches falsely imagined dharmas and thoroughly established dharmas. Among these, falsely imagined dharmas do not exist, so it is said they are “in their intrinsic nature absolutely nonexistent things.”  Thoroughly established dharmas are suchness in the aspect of existent things when they have been stopped. So, taking “nonexistent thing” in this sense, it says “in its intrinsic nature a nonexistent thing.” 
 An “existent thing” is so called because it has come into being. Hence a compounded phenomenon is called an “existent thing.” When it has stopped, that which is the inexpressible aspect of private self-awareness is called “the intrinsic nature when there is no existent thing,” taught as “suchness.” 
In that way, with just this, the existence and the nonexistence of all dharmas have been explained. And because the Lord has said,
 “They see perfectly that that in which something does not exist is empty of it, they know perfectly about that which is still left over in it, that ‘it is here,’ ”
therefore the characteristic mark of all dharmas—that they are in their intrinsic nature nonexistent—is absolutely not realized. This is 
“the emptiness of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.”
“The suchness of all dharmas, the suchness of the dharma-constituent, and the suchness of the very limit of reality”— 
it is true that suchness is always one. Nevertheless, it is presented as three in reference to its different bases: at the level of the knowledge of path aspects, at the level of the knowledge of all aspects, and at the all-knowledge level. The thoroughly established nature of any outer or inner dharma is “the suchness of all dharmas,” for example the suchness of a shape, the suchness of a sound, the suchness of a smell, and so on. The dharma body of all buddhas, the transformed tathāgata­garbha, is the second “suchness of the dharma-constituent” because it is the basis of all the buddhadharmas. The śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha nirvāṇa without remaining aggregates is “the suchness that is the very limit of reality.” That is what is being talked about where it says 
“ ‘I should not actualize the very limit of reality,’ ”
“or ‘do not appropriate’ a life in saṃsāra,”
and 
“but still do not actualize the very limit of reality.”
Furthermore, it speaks about the earlier “suchness of all dharmas” to teach that it is comprehended at the eighth level as effortlessly without conceptualization. As for this, it should be understood as being spoken about to teach the level when the end has been reached. 
“Want to know how many tiny particles of earth there are”
teaches, according to The Ten Bhūmis, the special qualities of the operation of knowledge on the tiny particles and so on.
“Want to blunt with the tip of one finger”—
just like walls and so on that have blunted the force of the wind, the single tip of a finger blunts the shaking wind that pervades all world regions as does a wall and so on.
“Want their single cross-legged posture to expand into and fill up…”— 
they want their posture to cover space, expanding into it and filling it up. 
“With a single alms bowl”
means with what they eat at one time, with what they eat at the proper time.
“How, Lord… when bodhisattva great beings are giving a gift?”
“How do they complete the six perfections with the perfection of giving alone?”
“The perfection of concentration… because of not being distracted and not constructing any ideas”—
because they are not distracted when they give a gift and then do not construct any idea about it they therefore complete the perfection of concentration. 
“The perfection of wisdom… by way of not apprehending the knowledge of all dharmas”
is saying that they know all phenomena with wisdom so they do not apprehend.
“The flesh eye, divine eye,”
and so on—the flesh eye is the form body eye. The divine eye knows all meditative stabilizations, absorptions, and clairvoyances.  The wisdom eye knows the knowledge of a knower of all. The Dharma eye knows the path wherever it goes, higher and lower faculties, various dispositions, and various constituents. The knowledge of a worthy one’s path included in the vajropama meditative stabilization is the buddha eye.
“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to hear the entire doctrine that the lord buddhas in all world systems in all ten directions explain, and having heard it take it up perfectly by applying the power of memory uninterruptedly, and who do not want any to be lost up until they awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should train in the perfection of wisdom.”
This passage is self-explanatory. 
“Blinding darkness”—
the regions between worlds are “blinding.”
They want the greatnesses of buddhas
“Want to train in the tathāgatas’ way of carrying themselves”—
it says this because the secrets of the body are within the range of those who have attained the tenth level. 
“Look down as an elephant looks”—
this is the gaze of holy beings. They do not look up at what is above, look down at what is below, look to the sides at what is to the right or left, twist their neck to look at what is behind, concentrate to look at what is far off, or look without concentrating at what is close by. This says that however they are carrying themselves and however they are looking, they “look down as an elephant looks” because they look at all beings and all dharmas in all world systems.
 It is said that 
“walk, stand, sit”
are the three ways they carry themselves when at the site of awakening; and
“lie down”
is when they pass into the great complete nirvāṇa. At both those times the ordinary earth cannot shake. 
 What would the fault be if all the earth  on which the Tathāgata trod were to have 
“become all diamond?”
It is because the five sorts of sense objects would not come about:
“in order to brings beings to maturity… taking to the five sorts of sense objects.”
It is true that bodhisattvas on the eighth level, like worthy ones, are totally 
“without afflictions,” 
and hence without even the faintest habituation to afflictive emotion, so they could never 
“make use of”
the five sorts of sense objects. Nevertheless, our Bodhisattva, 
“skilled”
in the ways of gathering a retinue, in order to gather beings through the consistency between his words and deeds magically produces duplicates of himself for each of twenty-four thousand women and thrills them all. Hence, he made a show of Yaśodharā and the other twenty-four thousand women and the nine thousand dancers together with their many attendants, and he made a show of old age, sickness, and death—there is nothing he did not do among the gods and Brahmās, bringing them to maturity in the three vehicles. Therefore, he made a show of using sense objects in order to bring beings to maturity. Thus, it says,
 “Then the Bodhisattva had this thought: 
“ ‘I know that without end are the faults of sense objects, the roots of suffering with their death, enmity, and pain, Scary, like poison, like a mesmerizing diagram, like fire, like the blades of swords. I have no yearning desire For the different sorts of sense objects. I do not deck myself out for life in the women’s quarters. Rather, I would live quietly in the forest at peace in my mind with the happiness of the concentrations and meditative stabilizations.’
“But still, having made an analysis and realized the skillful means, looking to bring beings to maturity he felt great compassion and at that time pronounced this verse:
“ ‘The lotus grows in the swamp; the king crowded around by men gets honor. When bodhisattvas acquire a mighty retinue They tame one hundred million billion beings with divine nectar. All earlier bodhisattvas with skillful means Made a show of wives, offspring, and women; unattached to sense objects, they did not destroy The ease of concentration, so I too will follow them in learning those qualities.’ ”
Qualm: If his enjoyment of sexual pleasure is not true, then it is a lie to say Rāhula is his son.
It is not a lie, because “son” is said not only of someone born from a womb on account of the enjoyment of sexual pleasure. There are also those born miraculously. Holy Rāhula, furthermore, was a bodhisattva great being who made a show of gestating in the womb because there was a purpose in doing so.
The second chapter, Production of the Thought.
 The “thought” here should be taken as wanting. It says “Production of the Thought chapter” to teach that wanting has arisen for all the qualities of a bodhisattva and all the qualities of a buddha.
How bodhisattvas endeavor
Having thus taught, in response to “why bodhisattvas endeavor,” that they have to endeavor to train in this now, in response to “how bodhisattvas endeavor,” in the passage, 
 Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not, even while they are bodhisattvas, see a bodhisattva. They do not see even the word bodhisattva. They do not see awakening either, and they do not see the perfection of wisdom. They do not see that ‘they practice,’ and they do not see that ‘they do not practice.’ They also do not see that ‘while practicing they practice and while not practicing do not practice,’ and they also do not see that ‘they do not practice, and do not not practice as well.’ They do not see form.  Similarly, they do not see feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness either,”
and so on, it teaches that they have to endeavor at practicing this. Śāriputra’s question, 
“Lord, how then should bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
about the threefold dharma—the bodhisattva, the perfection of wisdom, and the practice of it—is posed in a mode together with apprehending and with causal signs. 
Then, to eliminate those ways of apprehending, the Lord, by teaching three ways of not apprehending a bodhisattva, not apprehending the perfection of wisdom, and four ways of not apprehending practice speaks about the emptiness of not apprehending. The three absences of apprehending of a bodhisattva are not apprehending a bodhisattva, not apprehending a name, and not apprehending awakening.
 As for “even while they are bodhisattvas,” this is to stop the extreme of over-negation because there are true-dharmic-nature bodhisattvas. They “do not… see a bodhisattva” because of not apprehending a bodhisattva. “They do not see even the word” that is falsely imagined in nature. “They do not see awakening either,” because, apart from the transformation of the basis, a phenomenon with the name awakening does not exist. “And they do not see the perfection of wisdom,” because, apart from the pure dharma-constituent, a perfection of wisdom dharma does not exist. “They also do not see that ‘they practice’ ” because there is nothing to be done for all the qualities. “And they do not see that ‘they do not practice,’ ” because even though action has been taken as nonexistent, there is a purification of the dharma-constituent. “They also do not see that ‘while practicing they practice and while not practicing they do not practice,’ ”  that is, they do not, having combined them into one, see both, because those exact same two faults occur. “And they also do not see that ‘they do not practice, and do not not practice as well,’ ” because, even though the nonexistence as the two like that has been stated, that mental image of the nonexistence as the two is a mental image that does not exist, so they do not see it. 
 Having thus earlier taught that a bodhisattva does not exist on account of the emptiness of a person, now on account of the emptiness of the dharmas it teaches, “They do not see form. Similarly, they do not see feeling,” and so on. Therefore one does not exist in the form of the five aggregates either.
 Having taught that such options for practice cannot be apprehended, with
“and why?”
it teaches the reason why. In order to teach that “the name bodhisattva” and so on cannot be apprehended, and the “emptiness” of that can be apprehended, it says 
“the name bodhisattva is empty of the intrinsic nature of a name. The name bodhisattva is not empty because of emptiness,”
and so on. Thus, the name bodhisattva is falsely imagined and they do not exist with that falsely imagined intrinsic nature, but that which is the emptiness that is the nonexistence, that does exist. Therefore, that “name bodhisattva is not empty because of emptiness.” This avoids the extremes of over-reification and over-negation. 
 Hence, it teaches that the name bodhisattva does not exist on account of the intrinsic nature of the name. 
“The perfection of wisdom, too,”
does not exist in the form of a falsely imagined dharma. It does exist in the form of the pure dharma-constituent. The aggregates also do not exist on account of the intrinsic nature of the aggregates, but they do exist on account of the intrinsic nature that is the nonexistence of the aggregates. 
 Someone might still doubt this, so it says, “And why?” and teaches the reason. 
What is the doubt? It is that if all those dharmas do not exist on account of the intrinsic nature of the dharmas,  but do exist on account of the intrinsic nature of the emptinesses, then “the dharmas exist” would become a fact, and since just those that are “the dharmas that exist” would be sufficient, what is the use of saying they are emptinesses or anything else? It says, 
“Because the emptiness of the name bodhisattva is not the name bodhisattva…”
What does this teach? You cannot say, “The name bodhisattva is one thing and emptiness is another, so, because emptiness exists, therefore the name bodhisattva exists as well.” Similarly, you cannot say, “A bodhisattva is one thing and emptiness is another, so, because emptiness exists, a bodhisattva exists as well.” Construe the others like that also. 
 Having taught that, it addresses the doubt of others who think, “If emptiness is one thing and a dharma another, then the true nature of a dharma will be different than the dharma, and the dharma will be different than the true nature of the dharma, and that is not correct.” It says
“and there is no name bodhisattva apart from emptiness.”
This means the emptiness of the name bodhisattva is not something other than the name bodhisattva, so the dharma is not something other than the true nature of the dharma. 
 Others still doubt this, thinking that if a dharma does not differ from emptiness, and if emptiness exists, in that case the dharma will exist as well. It says 
“the name bodhisattva itself is emptiness.”
Just that thoroughly established name bodhisattva, free from a falsely imagined nature, is itself emptiness, and there is no “emptiness” other than that. 
“And emptiness is the name bodhisattva as well”
is the conclusion. This means that because the name bodhisattva is to be used for this, the thoroughly established nature, it is not to be used for the imaginary,  so only “emptiness is the name bodhisattva.” Similarly, construe “bodhisattva” and “awakening” with that in the same way as well.
The emptiness of the bodhisattva is not the bodhisattva. There is no bodhisattva apart from emptiness. The bodhisattva is emptiness. Emptiness is the bodhisattva as well.
 Thus, in this explanation, earlier it has said that “a bodhisattva is empty of the intrinsic nature of a bodhisattva, but… not empty because of emptiness.” Were it to have said that bodhisattvas exist with emptiness as their intrinsic nature, in that case it would have said that bodhisattvas just exist. So, it says “the emptiness of the bodhisattva is not the bodhisattva.” What it means to say is that the imaginary bodhisattva differs from emptiness so it does not have the fault. 
It says this, and then to someone who says that if a dharma and the true nature of a dharma are different, the true nature of a dharma would be something else, it says “there is no bodhisattva apart from emptiness,” which is to say, the thoroughly established bodhisattva is not other than emptiness. With “the bodhisattva is emptiness,” it has taught just that. It means the bodhisattva is emptiness. And again, “emptiness is the bodhisattva as well” is the conclusion. This means the thoroughly established bodhisattva and emptiness are not different. 
 Construe all similarly.
 Having said that others still entertain doubt, so it says 
“and why?” 
and teaches the reason. To someone who thinks, “If a bodhisattva and emptiness are not even slightly different bodhisattvas would be in their intrinsic nature emptiness, and hence  there would be no bodhisattvas,” it says, 
“because this—namely, bodhisattva—is just a name,”
and so on. Just that is exactly what we accept. 
It means this: When, given that they thus exist, you say that “they exist,” and you can suppose that “they” are the bodhisattva, the name bodhisattva, or the awakening, and so on. They all are nonexistent, which is to say imaginary phenomena are simply
“just names.”
“And because this—namely, emptiness—is just a name”—
when you think emptiness exists and investigate, even that is just a name; it does not exist in its intrinsic nature. 
 It is still not possible to be certain about this, so it says
“why?”
and teaches the reason. Someone may think that if those dharmas do not exist how could what does not exist have the appearance of production and stopping? How could terrible forms of life decrease and good forms of life increase? Why would there be defilement before and purification afterward? To them, it says 
“because where there is no intrinsic nature there is no production, stopping, decrease, increase, defilement, or purification.”
Given that all dharmas are without an intrinsic nature, if the intrinsic natures of the name bodhisattva and so on, up to those of feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness, ultimately exist, how could they have “production, stopping, decrease, increase, defilement, and purification”? 
 If there is thus one intrinsic nature, do you suppose it is a falsely imagined intrinsic nature, or is it a thoroughly established intrinsic nature? 
 Of those, a falsely imagined nature is absolutely nonexistent, like an illusion and so on. Just as there is no production  of illusory forms and so on when they appear, and no stopping when they do not appear, no decrease when they have turned into one, and no increase when they have turned into many, and just as there is not the slightest defilement or purification in them, similarly with imaginary natures. Because they are absolutely nonexistent they have no production, stopping, decrease, increase, defilement, or purification.
 Even awakening, the thoroughly established entity, is, moreover, absolutely isolated, and is beyond all imagination and like space, so it too is not produced and it also does not stop. It does not decrease and it does not increase. Because it is absolutely pure it has no defilement, and because it is pure in its intrinsic nature it has no purification. 
“And why?”
“Form is like an illusion, feeling is like an illusion,”
and so on explains. It explains, furthermore, in two parts: the nonexistence of the illusion, and the nonexistence of a grasper-subject consciousness in an illusion. 
“And an illusion is just a name that does not reside somewhere, does not reside in a particular place”
teaches that an illusion is imaginary and therefore does not exist. 
“The sight of an illusion is mistaken and does not exist”
teaches that consciousness does not exist. 
 There, “does not reside somewhere” teaches that the illusion is not marked as having form, because dharmas having forms do not reside anywhere. “Does not reside in a particular place” teaches that it is not marked as formless, because dharmas marked as formless such as consciousness and so on do not reside anywhere, but still, because they are designated as residing where there are the eyes and so on, they reside in a particular place. It “is mistaken” teaches that it is not true. It “does not exist” teaches that it is marked as a nonexistent thing. 
“And is devoid of an intrinsic nature”
teaches that it does not exist in its intrinsic nature. 
“Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that do not see production,”
and so on,
“in any dharma at all”
teaches that they understand analytically that a bodhisattva is like an illusion. There, in a falsely imagined phenomenon the two—
“production… stopping”—
do not exist because they are simply just appearance and nonappearance; in a dependent phenomenon the two—
“decrease… increase”—
do not exist because they are simply just imagined; and in a thoroughly established phenomenon the two—
“defilement… purification”—
do not exist because they are simply just in their basic nature a state of purity. Thus all phenomena do not exist in their intrinsic nature.
But still, in order to eliminate a doubt, it says, 
“And why? Because names are made up.”
Those names and causal signs of the aggregates—
“form, feeling, perception,”
and so on—are made up and do not exist on account of their own intrinsic natures. Therefore, it should be understood that all phenomena have no intrinsic nature, because an intrinsic nature would not be made up. 
 As for a made-up state, that is taught by 
“those interdependent dharmas, they are imagined,”
and so on. 
This means those phenomena based on conceptualized causes and conceptualized conditions that are imagined like this or like that, which are called dependent originations. Therefore, it is teaching the following: If those phenomena are contingent on something else, then they come about through the power of something else; they do not come about through their own power, in which case how could they be an intrinsic nature? Therefore, since they are without their own existence, they have an existence from something else, so it is established that all dharmas do not have their own intrinsic nature. Therefore, it is said that “the meaning of the absence of an intrinsic nature is the meaning of dependent origination.” 
 Furthermore, to teach that verbal designations come from imaginary names as causes;  that settling down on those as real happens because of the force of the verbal designations; that the mental construction of the causes of the names happens because of the force of settling down on them as real; that verbal designations again come because of the force of that; and that yet again settling down on those as real happens because of the force of the verbal designations, that is to say, to teach that they come about in such a sequence, it says
“names plucked out of thin air working subsequently as conventional labels,”
and so on. Because they are “plucked out” based not on an intrinsic nature but on “thin air,” they are “subsequently… conventional labels,” expressions from other “names,” conventional terms—that is to say, this teaches verbal designations. And again, 
“just as they are subsequently conventionally labeled, so too are they settled down on as real”
teaches that they are the cause of settling down on them as real. This means that settling down on “just this is the inherent existence of dharmas” comes about through the force of the ignorance and so on that has come about through the force of the expression having become ingrained.
 Having taught the incorrect attention of foolish beings, it teaches the stages of the correct attention of bodhisattvas with, 
“when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not see any of those names as inherently existing,”
and so on. “Any… names” are imaginary names and causal signs. Because they are plucked out of thin air, “they do not see” them “as inherently existing”; 
“because they do not see them, they do not settle down on them as real”;
and because they have no intrinsic nature, they are simply just mistakes. 
 After that, 
“moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom think,”
and so on, teaches the correct attention in detail. They understand analytically that the person
“bodhisattvas,”
the dharma
“awakening,”
the person
“the awakened one,”
the dharmas
“the perfection of wisdom… form,”
and so on— the names for the dharmas—and even the name bodhisattva, are simply just names. 
 For that there is also an explanation with an example: 
“For example, Śāriputra, ‘self’ is said again and again,”
and so on. This means that even though a self can be apprehended conventionally, ultimately it is an emptiness, so it 
“cannot be apprehended”
because the mark of something that cannot be apprehended is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Then it also sums up what corresponds to the example with, 
“Similarly, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom also…,”
and so on. They
“do not see” 
the fivefold dharmas of the bodhisattvas, and so on. Because they do not see those, the causes do not exist, so 
“they do not see even the names”
and causal signs. Because they do not see those, the causes do not exist, so they do not 
“settle down on them as real.”
“Because they do not see what would make them settle down on them as real”
teaches that because settling down on them as real does not exist, they do not apprehend even the cause of settling down on them as real. They do not see the conventional term for a causal sign, or the causal sign on account of which the mind imagining the unreal settles down, or the mind.
 Having thus taught the practice that cannot be apprehended, it then teaches what is in harmony with that as its cause, with
“setting aside the wisdom of a tathāgata, [they]… surpass the wisdom of all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.”
 Then, to arouse enthusiasm in that retinue of trainees by teaching the greatnesses of bodhisattvas who have set forth into this practice that cannot be apprehended, it teaches their exceptional status with,
“To illustrate, Śāriputra, if this Jambudvīpa were filled with monks similar in worth to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana,”
and so on. 
“A thicket of naḍa reeds, or a thicket of bamboo, or a thicket of sugarcane, or a thicket of rushes, or a thicket of rice, or a thicket of sesame” 
teaches only types that are inferior because they are inferior to trees, creepers, and so on, which are attractive. They are, furthermore, of three types: extremely attractive and extremely tall, middling attractive and middling tall, and least attractive and least tall. Among these, the two—naḍa reeds and rushes—are extremely attractive and extremely tall. It gives the sugarcane and bamboo in the middle because they are inferior to those and hence middling. It sets forth the rice and sesame last because they are thinner than those, hence inferior. Furthermore, among these, of the two, the rushes and the naḍa reeds, it teaches naḍa reeds first because they are hollow inside and have a lot of thorns and are themselves extremely attractive. “Rushes” teaches the species in general. Furthermore, it teaches the sugarcane before rushes because, of the two, the rushes and the sugarcane, rushes cannot stand up to even just the better and more attractive leaves of the sugarcane. And again, of the two, the rice and the sesame, it mentions rice earlier because it is bigger and more attractive than sesame. 
“would not approach … even by a hundredth part, nor by a thousandth part, nor by a hundred thousandth part; it would not stand up to any number, or fraction, or counting, or analogy, or comparison.”
When you conclusively explain these differences, they are of four sorts: part, number, analogy, and something to do with cause and effect. Among these, from “a hundredth part” up to “a hundred thousandth part” teaches that śrāvaka wisdom does not become an object for comparison even when the bodhisattvas’ knowledge has been cut into parts; “any number, or fraction, or counting” teaches that it cannot be counted in numbers; “or analogy” teaches that there is no possible analogy for it; and “or comparison” teaches that it is not suitable to be something to do with cause and effect. 
 There, in “even one hundredth part,” a “part,” a “bit,” and a “branch” are the same. It means 
“the wisdom”
of those monks does not stand up to even a fraction of 
“the wisdom of a bodhisattva”
even if it has been divided up into one hundred parts, one thousand parts, or even a hundred thousand parts. 
 Again, a numerical counting is of three types.
 That which comes within the range of the words one, two, three, up to a hundred thousand, is a number counted in words. “Number” teaches that.
 A part is a calculation, a derivation, an addition, or a subtraction, and so on, performed on that which has become an object of the word for a particular number, or a calculation by reduction or by laying out cowrie shells and so on, or by hand. “Part” teaches that. 
 Those from one hundred million billion, up to a number with no number above it, on which such calculation cannot be carried out and which are counted only through the power of clairvoyance, are a count. “Counting” teaches that. 
 Similarly, some things are not the same in all essentials, but are roughly similar in some respects. It is suitable to ascertain what it is from that: for example, “a water buffalo is like a bull.” Because nothing like it exists, it says “or analogy.” 
 It is similar even with something taken as an extremely different thing: because it cannot be inferred like an awareness of fire from seeing smoke, it says it does not bear “comparison.” 
The four continents are the four continents, and a thousand of those is the “one thousand.” A thousand of those is the “millionfold.” A thousand of those is the “billionfold.” With its girdle of a hundred ten million mountains, it is the “billionfold.” 
“As many… as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River”
is said to be a particular number.
 Having thus taught the greatness of a bodhisattva’s wisdom, 
“venerable Śāriputra,”
knowing how some in the retinue think, asks a question to remove their doubt with, 
“Lord, the wisdom of śrāvaka stream enterers,” 
and so on. 
“All those wisdoms are not broken apart; they are a detachment, are not produced, and are empty of an intrinsic nature.”
Doubt arises in beings, thinking that the wisdoms of them all, in the form of a fundamental transformation, are nonconceptual and extraordinary. Because they are in the form of a unity they are “not broken apart”; because they are in the form of a purity they are “a detachment”; because they are in the form of an uncompounded phenomenon they are “not produced”; and because they are free from an intrinsic nature that is the imagination of the unreal, they are “empty of an intrinsic nature.” 
“Variation”—
things that are just plucked out of thin air under the power of causes and conditions are the variety. 
“Distinction”
is from having different intrinsic natures. 
“So how, Lord, could…”
is asking how, given that the wisdoms have the same intrinsic nature, could it be right that one surpasses another?
 With 
“what do you think, Śāriputra,”
and so on, the Lord teaches that there are no distinctions in that intrinsic nature, but still, because of the force of an earlier prayer that is a vow there is a different cause and there is a different result. The cause, furthermore, is threefold: intention, practice, and work. The results are two: complete awakening and turning the wheel of the Dharma. There, 
“furnished with the best of all aspects”
teaches the greatness of motivation; 
“practicing the knowledge of all aspects”
teaches the greatness of practice; and 
“working for the welfare of all beings”
teaches the greatness of work. 
“Having fully awakened to all dharmas in all forms”
teaches a feature of the result—complete awakening; 
“lead all beings to complete nirvāṇa”
teaches turning the wheel of the Dharma. 
 Then  there are three connected sections of teachings: a section to do with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas not having the bodhisattvas’ earlier prayer that is a vow, a section to do with them not having the cause-and-effect prayer that is a vow, and a section to do with a bodhisattva having both. 
 There, the section teaching not having the earlier prayer is the passage from,
“What do you think, Śāriputra, do all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas think, ‘We must, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ ”
and so on, up to
“hence it surpasses the wisdom of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.”
The bodhisattvas’ earlier prayer that is a vow is in the form of wisdom and compassion, so, taking hold of complete awakening with wisdom and taking hold of beings with compassion, it operates with the twofold nature in “I must, having become awakened, awaken others too.” Hence in this section to do with the earlier prayer is a teaching about complete awakening and leading beings to complete nirvāṇa. 
 Then, the section teaching not having the cause-and-effect prayer is the passage from,
“What do you think, Śāriputra, do all these śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas think, ‘We must, having practiced the six perfections,’ ”
and so on, up to
“ ‘lead infinite, countless beings beyond measure to complete nirvāṇa.’ ”
This section teaches six things: four causes—the work that brings personal maturity, brings beings to maturity, purifies a buddhafield, and brings the buddhadharmas to maturity—and two results: complete awakening and beings who are in complete nirvāṇa. The prayer that is a vow during the time of practice comes next. 
 The section teaching that bodhisattvas have them both  is the passage from,
“Śāriputra, a bodhisattva great being thinks…,”
and so on, up to
“lead infinite, countless beings beyond measure to complete nirvāṇa.”
 After that it teaches about śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, using the analogy of 
“fireflies,”
and then teaches about bodhisattvas, using the analogy of 
“the sun”
dawning. The teaching of the topic in this section of the text with the two analogies is clear, so there is no need to teach what it means. Again, after that, to remove the retinue’s doubts, the venerable Śāriputra asks three questions, beginning with, 
“How, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings, having passed…,”
and so on: How do they stand, having passed beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels; how do they stand, having reached the irreversible level; and how do they stand while purifying the awakening path? Then the Lord teaches that from 
“their first”—
on the Pramuditā level—
“production of the thought onward”
after passing beyond the first uncountable eon, their conceptualization of 
“emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness”
that are the marks of all 
“dharmas” 
causes them to pass
“beyond the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level”; 
having passed beyond those to reach 
“the irreversible” 
eighth
“level”; 
and with
“the [six] perfections”
that come to maturity, purify the awakening path. 
 Then the venerable Śāriputra is of two minds about whether the moment they pass beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha level they become worthy of their offerings or whether it is at some other time, so he makes an inquiry with, 
“Standing on which level, Lord, do bodhisattva [great beings],”
and so on. Then the Lord, with 
“in the interval from their first production of the thought,”
and so on, teaches that they are worthy of their offerings the moment they reach the Pramuditā level. It teaches the reason for that with, 
“Because Śāriputra, it is thanks to bodhisattva great beings that all wholesome dharmas appear in the world,”
and so on. 
 Then there are three sections that teach those dharmas: the section teaching wholesome dharmas with and without outflows, the section teaching the maturation of the wholesome with outflows, and the section teaching the maturation of the wholesome without outflows. In regard to the section teaching wholesome dharmas with and without outflows there are three sections: teaching the dharmas of householders, male lay practitioners, and female lay practitioners; teaching the dharmas of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas; and teaching the dharmas of buddhas. 
“The ten wholesome actions, the morality with five branches, the morality with eight branches”—
those three dharmas are morality, and the dharmas of male lay practitioners, and female lay practitioners. Those starting with 
“the concentrations” 
and ending with 
“the path” 
are the dharmas of śrāvakas. The dharmas starting with 
“the perfections” 
and ending with the 
“distinct attributes of a buddha”
are the dharmas of buddhas. 
 Then, 
“because those wholesome dharmas appear in the world, there are great sāla tree-like royal families in the world,”
and so on, teaches beings included in the desire, form, and formless realms, so it teaches the maturation of the wholesome with outflows.
“stream enterers appear in the world,”
and so on, is a teaching about all the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas and 
“the perfectly complete buddhas,”
so it teaches the maturation of the wholesome without outflows. As for 
“purifies the offering,”
it says “purifies the offering” about those for whom there is a great and a purified result when they offer to them. 
“Because the offering is absolutely pure”
is teaching that this is the true dharmic nature of the bodhisattvas’ offering, because they are 
“a giver.”
The defining marks of those who endeavor
It has thus taught how they should endeavor.  To teach “the defining marks of those who endeavor,” 
Śāriputra 
makes an inquiry about them:
“Lord, how are bodhisattva great beings who engage with the perfection of wisdom ‘engaged’?” 
Then
the Lord 
brings all dharmas together in seven separate groups—aggregates, constituents, sense fields, noble truths, dependent origination, all compounded phenomena, and all uncompounded dharmas—and says, 
“You cannot say… that they ‘are engaged’ or ‘are not engaged.’ ”
He does so to teach that
“when”
they
“are practicing with these seven emptinesses,”
you cannot say, first of all, that they “are engaged” because they do not fulfill how they should endeavor just by that; and you cannot say they “are not engaged” because they have started the endeavor.
 For those who entertain the doubt about how they would then engage, it says 
“and why?”
and then says they engage when they practice a fourfold emptiness:
the intrinsic nature of each—of form and so on, separately—that cannot be apprehended; the intrinsic nature of them as a collection that cannot be apprehended;their defining marks that cannot be apprehended; and the totality of dharmas that cannot be apprehended. 
It teaches this in detail, from
“because they do not see form as qualified by production or qualified by stopping,”
up to
“they do not see a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, a buddha, or awakening.”
The intrinsic nature of each—of form and so on, separately—that cannot be apprehended
“Because they do not see form as qualified by production or qualified by stopping” means “has production as its intrinsic nature or has stopping as its intrinsic nature.” If form had production as its intrinsic nature, it would not have stopping as its intrinsic nature; if it had stopping as its intrinsic nature, it would not have production as its intrinsic nature, because the existence of two intrinsic natures in one thing is a complete contradiction. 
 Were a form to have the dharma called production,  there would be four ways to conceive of it: as being produced from itself, produced from other, produced from both, or produced without a cause. Of these, it is not logical that it is produced from itself because at that time it is a dharma that has not been produced, and a nonexistent entity is not suitable to be the cause of production. Were that dharma to exist prior to production that also would be illogical, because the production again of something that already exists is illogical. When you investigate a production from something that exists, the production would happen at all times and there would never be nonproduction. Hence production from self is illogical.
 Production from other is illogical too, because if other things were produced from something other, then everything would be produced from everything. 
 And production from both does not escape those two faults either. 
 Production without a cause is also illogical because everything would be produced everywhere. When you analyze like that, ultimately there is no production. As it is said,
There are never any thingsAnywhere producedFrom self, other, both,Or without a cause.
 It is not logical that it has the dharma of stopping either, because it has no production. Thus, something produced stops, and something not produced does not stop. Furthermore, if there were a dharma called stopped, would it be categorized as a dharma that exists or that does not exist? Of these, if it does exist it is not feasible that it stops because both existing and not existing are impossible in one thing. If it does not exist, it is not tenable that it stops because it is nonexistent. Thus, like a rabbit’s horn, to say “it stops” is unsuitable. Again, it is said,
If just that producingOf all things is not feasible,Then the stoppingOf all things is not feasible.
Existing and not existingAre not feasible in one thing.
Stopping what does not existIs also not feasible,Just as there isNo second decapitation. 
Thus production and stopping are imaginary phenomena, simply just conventions. They do not ultimately exist. Thus, it says, “Because they do not see form as qualified by production or qualified by stopping…”
 Similarly, “defilement” or “purification” of form and so on is not feasible. Were something to be defilement in its intrinsic nature, purification would never happen because an intrinsic nature is not something that can be given up. If it were to be qualified by purification, thoroughly pure in its intrinsic nature, defilement would never happen. Furthermore, if dharmas have become a defilement you can suppose it happens to what was a defilement or was pure. If what were defilement became defiled, defilement would be meaningless because you do not have to produce defilement in what is already defiled. And as long as that is the case, defilement would be produced again and again, and purification would never happen.
 And it is also not feasible that that which is pure are the defilements because that entails a contradiction. 
Similarly, with purification, you can suppose it happens to what was a defilement or was pure. There could be no purification of what was a defilement because those two things exclude each other. And it is also illogical that purification is of that which is pure, because it is pure, so that would be meaningless.
 Hence, defilement and purification are ultimately not there, but still, onto the suchness that is pure in its intrinsic nature, during the ordinary person phase, defilement that is just plucked out of thin air is merely labeled as defilement,  and during the pure phase the nonexistence of the defilement that is plucked out of thin air is merely labeled as purification. It is not feasible that they are the true dharmic nature of form and so on. Thus it says, 
“They do not see form as qualified by defilement or qualified by purification.”
The intrinsic nature of them as a collection that cannot be apprehended
Thus, how form and so on have no intrinsic nature has been explained. Now, they
“do not see ‘a confluence of form with feeling,’ ”
and so on, teaches that a collection does not have the defining mark of an aggregate. An aggregate means they have aggregated. It would exist were it possible that those that have aggregated are a confluence, but there is no confluence of dharmas. Hence it has taught that “there is not even the defining mark of an aggregate.”
Suppose there were a confluence of dharmas—still it would be unmistaken, or it would have one defining mark. As for form, it is not together with feeling and so on and unmistaken. They have different defining marks. Similarly, it is not feasible that feeling and so on is together in a confluence with form. And so too with feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness—each has its own particular defining mark, so how could those things that have their own marks and are completely different be in a confluence in an aggregate with a single intrinsic nature? 
 Furthermore, beside form, feeling and so on, those phenomena that are constituted of form and feeling and so on are imaginary, are like an illusion, empty of a basic nature. Just as things like illusory horses and elephants and so on are not ultimately collected into one, similarly imaginary form and so on are also not collected into one. 
 Those that are constituted of the suchnesses of form and so on are also just empty of a basic nature. There, 
“because they are empty of a basic nature”
teaches  that just as space is not collected together with space, so too with the true dharmic natures of form and so on. 
 This just teaches the heading. Thus connect this with: form is not collected together with feeling, and feeling and so on are not collected together with form; feeling is not collected together with perception and so on, and perception and so on are not collected together with feeling; perception is not collected together with volitional factors and so on, and volitional factors and so on are not collected together with perception; and volitional factors are not collected together with consciousness, and consciousness is not collected together with volitional factors.
Their defining marks that cannot be apprehended
Now, to eliminate those specific defining marks of form and so on, it teaches
“that emptiness of form is not form,”
and so on. Thus, it teaches that when they have engaged in the correct practice of emptiness, and imaginary form, and so on not appearing as the mark of form and so on, but appearing as the mark of emptiness, at that time “that emptiness of form is not form.” 
Thinking, 
“And why?”
it says,
“Because, Śāriputra, that emptiness of form is not seeable.”
Form is the word used when there is the defining mark seeable. Thus, in emptiness there is nothing that shows itself, so it is not form; thus there is no 
“experience,”
so it is not feeling; thus there is no 
“being collected together and knowing,”
so it is not perception; thus there is no
“occasioning anything,” 
so it is not volitional factors; thus, in that emptiness there is no 
“making conscious,”
so it is not consciousness.
 Thus, those specific defining marks of form and so on are eliminated. Having said that,  entertaining the doubt that if the defining mark that is being seeable and so on is not there, the words for form and so on will not refer to anything, it says,
“And why?”
and with,
“Because… form is not one thing and emptiness another; emptiness is not one thing and form another,”
it teaches that the words for form and so on should be taken to refer to the form and so on that is its true dharmic nature, that emptiness and form and so on are not different. 
The totality of dharmas that cannot be apprehended
Therefore, with
“form is itself emptiness, and emptiness is form,”
it teaches that all dharmas as a totality, as well as the words for form and so on, should be taken to refer to emptiness, and the word for emptiness should be taken to refer to the form and so on that is its true dharmic nature. The emptiness spoken of earlier teaches all aspects.
 As for,
“Śāriputra, that emptiness is not produced and does not stop,”
and so on, because of being produced and stopping, it
“does not decrease and does not increase,”
so it
“is not past, is not future, and is not present.”
Because the mark of form and so on does not exist, the totality of dharmas cannot be apprehended in that, and therefore it teaches,
“In such as that,”
where the totality of dharmas cannot be apprehended,
“there is no form, there is no feeling, there is no perception,”
up to
“there is no buddha; there is no awakening.”
 Having thus taught elevenfold the marks of the endeavor, it then teaches that 
they have forsaken the idea that they are “engaged” or “not engaged” with self;they have forsaken the idea that they are “engaged” or “not engaged” with the three gateways to liberation; they have forsaken the idea that they are “engaged” or “not engaged” with the marks particular to dharmas; they have forsaken joining dharmas with limits; they have forsaken joining limits one with the other; they have forsaken joining dharmas with the three time periods; they have forsaken joining dharmas with the knowledge of all aspects; they have forsaken joining all dharmas with originating and perishing; they have forsaken joining all dharmas with being permanent and so on; they have forsaken joining just those with the doors to liberation; they have forsaken joining dharmas in the various ways; they have forsaken joining with the clairvoyances; they have forsaken joining with the objects of the clairvoyances; they have forsaken the idea of coming together and separating; they have forsaken the idea of complete awakening; and they have forsaken the idea of joining with emptiness. 
Thus, when they train in the practice of emptiness they endeavor at the perfection of wisdom in sixteen ways. 
Among those, 
“they do not see the practice of the perfection of wisdom as either ‘engaged’ or ‘not engaged’ with form”
because they do not entertain the idea that the self is an agent and so on, so grasping at “I” is not operating. 
“Neither cause emptiness to engage with emptiness”—
were they, when they cultivate the emptiness meditative stabilization, to have cultivated it while thinking there is some other dharma “emptiness,” then an emptiness would be joining to an intrinsic nature of emptiness. Since that is the case, even a meditation on the emptiness aspect that is that totality of dharmas that cannot be apprehended is aspectless. 
 Hence it says they “neither cause emptiness to engage with emptiness.”
 In
“the yogic practice of emptiness as well,”
the yogic practice of emptiness is the emptiness meditation stabilization. This means they do not join the yogic practice of emptiness to another inherently existing yogic practice of emptiness.
 Similarly connect this with: because they do not entertain the idea of some other dharma, 
“signlessness”;
and because they do not entertain the idea there is some other dharma,
“wishlessness.”
Therefore, it says
“emptiness is neither a yogic practice nor not a yogic practice.”
Because emptiness  is separated from the cognitive dimension of a yogic practice of any other imaginary phenomena such as form and so on, it is, therefore, not a yogic practice; and because it is in its nature inexpressible and the intrinsic nature of the signlessness meditative stabilization, it is, therefore, not not a yogic practice. 
 As for
“they do not engage with nor disengage from form”—
they do not engage because they do not see in the true dharmic nature of form and so on their defining marks—being seeable and so on—because they are empty of their own defining marks. Therefore, it says they
“enter into the emptiness of the marks particular to dharmas.”
 It says
“they do not join form with the prior limit,”
and then states as the reason for that:
“because they do not even see the prior limit.”
They do not see the three time periods such as the prior limit and so on, so how, given that they do not see them, could they be engaged with them? 
“They do not join the prior limit with the later limit”—
when they practice by way of apprehending consequences—that this is the sort of later maturation experienced on account of that earlier action—it is said that they 
“join the prior limit with the later limit and… join the later limit with the prior limit.”
When they practice with the idea that this, the maturation of that earlier action, is in the present, it is said that they join the present with the prior limit, and join the prior limit with the present. When they practice with the idea that this action that has been done in the present will mature in the future, it is said that they join the present to the future, and join the future to the present. 
For those seeing the three periods of time as a sameness, there are no different times, because time cannot be apprehended in any form. Therefore, it says
“because of the sameness of the three periods of time.”
 It has said “they do not join form with the past,” and with “because they do not even see the past,” has stated the reason for that.  Joining, such as “this sort of form was in the past; this sort of form will be in the future; form is here in the present,” is joining form with the three periods of time.
“[Bodhisattva great beings]… do not join form with the knowledge of all aspects”—
when there is the idea that “this form is an object of the knowledge of all aspects,” that it is a real thing that can be apprehended, or thinking, “Giving this form, and so on, transformed into a basis of meritorious action becomes the result, the knowledge of all aspects,” when there is the idea that it is a real cause, it is said that it is joined with the knowledge of all aspects.
“[They]… do not join a buddha with the knowledge of all aspects”:
“the knowledge of all aspects is the cause of a buddha,” and “awakening is by comprehending all dharmas with the knowledge of all aspects”—they “do not join” them like that because buddha, awakening, and the knowledge of all aspects have the same characteristic mark and in the form of the dharma body are not different. Therefore, it says
“a buddha is the knowledge of all aspects, and the knowledge of all aspects is the buddha as well,”
and so on. 
 Where it says,
“Form is not joined with ‘originating.’ Form is not joined with ‘perishing,’ ”
the view of origination and the view of perishing are the view that it is permanent and the view that it is annihilated—they do not entertain those.
“[Form] is not joined with ‘permanent,’ ”
based on a view, nor
“with ‘impermanent,’ ”
based on conceptualization. Construe the others like this as well. 
“Form is not joined with ‘calm,’ ”
because imaginary form and so on do not have the mark of nirvāṇa.
“Form is not joined with ‘not calm,’ ”
because the true dharmic nature of form does not have the mark of saṃsāra.
“The knowledge of all aspects does not join with ‘calm,’ ”
because such an idea is not applicable. Similarly,  the idea of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness does not apply either. Construe the alternatives of 
“ ‘practicing,’ ”
and so on like this as well.
“[Bodhisattva great beings]… do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of the perfection of giving”—
all dharmas, in their true dharmic nature, are not different, since it is not possible to grasp them as different. All, in the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom, are not different either. Therefore, it says, they 
“do not see a difference in any dharma.”
They
“do not even see the perfection of wisdom itself, not to mention a bodhisattva, so however could they apprehend fully all the clairvoyances?”
It says that, because the clairvoyances are in their intrinsic nature imaginary phenomena and are imaginary phenomena apprehending things. Construe the connected sections on the objects of the clairvoyances and the attainment of benefits like that as well. 
A defining mark of the endeavor is the attainment of a benefit of it, so it teaches that with,
“Śāriputra, Māra the wicked one does not gain entry to a bodhisattva great being practicing the perfection of wisdom like this,”
and so on.
“Any phenomenon united with”
teaches saṃsāra, and 
“separated”
teaches nirvāṇa. 
“Come together with or not come together with them”
teaches something other than those two.
“Because the dharma-constituent does not fully awaken by means of the dharma-constituent,”
suchness does not cause suchness to fully awaken. 
 They
“do not join form to emptiness”—
they do not join form with its intrinsic nature, emptiness, and they do not join the name form to the name emptiness—
“and do not join emptiness to form”—
they do not join emptiness with the intrinsic nature of form, and they do not join them thinking emptiness is the name of form. 
 Alternatively, they “do not join form to emptiness” means they do not join them thinking, ‘form is empty’;  they do not break form and emptiness apart.
“Śāriputra, you should bear in mind that bodhisattva great beings engaged like that have been prophesied”—
because they have reached the eighth level they have been prophesied, 
“or are close to being prophesied,”
because they are worthy of a prophesy. 
 Forbearance for dharmas that are not produced is attained at the eighth level, and the matured perfections emerge. With the emergence of the matured perfections, they practice the six perfections without having to exert themselves to bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield, and, having fully awakened, turn the wheel of the Dharma—they accomplish them all effortlessly. Thus it teaches that matured practice works effortlessly
“for the welfare of infinite, countless beings beyond measure, but still it will not occur to them to think, ‘The lord buddhas will make a prophesy about me. I am close to being prophesied,’ ”
and so on. And it states the reason why they stand there effortlessly, with
“because they do not make the dharma-constituent into a causal sign.”
From that point on they do not apply themselves to apprehending anything not included in the dharma-constituent. They do not even make that dharma-constituent itself into a causal sign and apprehend it. 
 Then it teaches the benefits of the forbearance for dharmas that are not produced, with,
“Because the notion of a being does not occur to bodhisattva great beings… like that. And why? Because a being is absolutely not produced and does not cease, because the true dharmic nature of dharmas is not produced and does not cease.”
“Practices the perfection of wisdom as an unproduced and unceasing being”
teaches that from that point on their practice does not apprehend a being.  Even though conventionally through the force of compassion a consciousness arises, which is to say at that time they complete giving and so on for the welfare of beings, nevertheless they still abide doing everything as beings who are “unproduced and unceasing,” who are
“emptiness… and cannot be apprehended,”
and are 
“in an isolated state.”
Then, in order to teach that their abiding is an extremely special one, it says so with,
“Śāriputra, this… is the bodhisattva great beings’ ultimate yogic practice,”
and so on. 
Then, even though beings cannot be apprehended, the classifications of the activities for the welfare of beings—love and compassion and so on, and giving and morality and so on—are taught with
“[they] accomplish… great love, great compassion,”
and so on. The six statements—
“they do not practice with a miserly thought,”
and so on—teach the absence of the factors opposed to all six perfections.
Those who endeavor
Then, in order to delight the retinue, and in order that the explanation of the doctrine will be bigger than in just that section, the elder [Śāriputra] asks, 
“Where did they die… who have taken birth here?”
and so on. Among them, those who are supreme arrive from a buddhafield and go to a buddhafield, the middling arrive from Tuṣita, and the least arrive from among humans. Thus, it teaches them as three types. 
 Then, 
“Śāriputra, there are… bodhisattva great beings without skillful means,”
and so on, teaches about the bodhisattvas included in forty-four types in order to teach that there are even more than those in that section. 
 [Those with dull faculties.] Of the first two of those who do not have skillful means, the former without skillful means endeavor at the practice of the concentrations and the practice of the perfections but, without skillful means, take birth as long-lived gods, and for that amount of time  do not endeavor at the perfections. Later, when they take human birth through the power of their earlier practice of the perfections, they again endeavor but have dull faculties. 
 Second are those who endeavor at the practice of the concentrations and the practice of the perfections, reject the results of the concentrations, and do not take birth as gods, but take human birth. Still, without skillful means they are those with dull faculties. 
 All the ones after these have keen faculties:
First. It teaches the first of them with
“will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening right here in the Fortunate Eon.”
Having trained in the practice of the concentrations and the bodhisattvas’ practice, the force of their compassion stops them being born through the influence of the concentrations. Focused on working for the welfare of beings, and focused on pleasing the buddhas, they fully awaken in just this Fortunate Eon itself. 
Second. Endowed with those good qualities they bring to maturity those beings they have not previously brought to maturity. 
Third. Endowed with those good qualities they take birth among the six classes of gods living in the desire realm. Abiding in a state endowed with complete strength, they work to bring beings to maturity, purify a buddhafield, and please the buddhas. 
Fourth. They take birth in the Brahmaloka, and because they have made a prayer that is a vow that with their miraculous powers they will pass on from buddhafield to buddhafield, listen to the doctrine, focus on pleasing the buddhas, and make requests, they request those who have recently become fully and perfectly awakened to turn the wheel of the Dharma.
Fifth. They are like, for example, our Lord Maitreya.
Sixth. With the strength of their clairvoyances they pass on to all buddhafields and worship all the tathāgatas. 
Seventh. They remain with their  clairvoyances in operation and generate the desire to be in just purified buddhafields.
Eighth. Through the force of their clairvoyances they take birth in buddhafields where the lifespan is infinite and, remaining there for as long as their lifespan endures, they endeavor to bring beings and the buddhadharmas to maturity. 
Ninth. Through the force of the clairvoyances they proclaim the qualities of the Three Jewels in deficient worlds where beings do not know the qualities of the Three Jewels because there are no words for Buddha, Dharma, or Saṅgha. By explaining the doctrine that has those three words they generate a delight in them, and through the force of that cause them to take birth in a buddhafield. 
Tenth. Having taken birth in a purified buddhafield, those who naturally have fewer afflictions reach the first level with little effort; acquire the four concentrations, the meditative stabilizations, and the formless absorptions; cultivate the dharmas on the side of awakening and the buddhadharmas; die in that purified buddhafield; pass on to unpurified world systems; and work for the welfare of beings. 
Eleventh. Endowed with just those previously mentioned bodhisattva qualities they take birth in a purified buddhafield, reach the first level, immediately enter into “the secure state” of a bodhisattva and reach the irreversible level. 
Twelfth. Endowed with just those qualities, because of the power generated by a buddhafield, their own personal good qualities purify their mindstream and they reach the first level with little effort. Right after that, without having to work hard, they become fully awakened and turn the wheel of the Dharma, causing the teaching to flourish for as long as they exist.
Thirteenth. Endowed with just those qualities they take birth in a purified buddhafield, reach the first level with little effort, and having done so, without taking birth on the higher levels  become absorbed in all the yogic practices of the perfection of wisdom and in order to purify a buddhafield they take birth in buddhafield after buddhafield.
Fourteenth. They dwell in the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom and, having become absorbed in the viṣkandaka absorption, keep dwelling on account of those absorptions. 
Fifteenth. Endowed with the dharmas on the side of awakening and endowed with the buddhadharmas, they thoroughly understand the results of stream enterer and so on with their knowledge of mastery, but, without actualizing them, establish others in those paths and results. Just that 
“knowledge”
of mastery 
“is a bodhisattva [great being’s]” 
supreme 
“forbearance.”
Sixteenth. They are bodhisattvas of the Fortunate Eon who, having become fully awakened in this very eon, dwell in the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom and purify the Tuṣita abode. 
Seventeenth. They are bodhisattvas obstructed by just a single birth who are endowed with all śrāvaka, pratyekabuddha, and buddha dharmas, and with their knowledge of mastery remain searching for the noble truths. 
Eighteenth. They become fully awakened over the course of many hundred thousands of one hundred million incalculable eons and keep on endeavoring at working for the welfare of beings, like, for example, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta.
Nineteenth. Similarly, they have strived to fully awaken and remain explaining the doctrine to beings.
Twentieth. Similarly, working for the welfare of beings they dwell in buddhafield after buddhafield. 
Twenty-first. They stand in the six perfections, and with their generosity they also satisfy beings and establish beings in generosity.
Twenty-second.  With morality they gather beings together and establish them in morality. 
Twenty-third. They establish beings in patience. 
Twenty-fourth. They establish beings in perseverance. 
Twenty-fifth. They establish beings in concentration. 
Twenty-sixth. They establish beings in wisdom. 
Twenty-seventh. Disguised as buddhas they bring beings in the eastern direction to maturity, focus on pleasing the buddhas, apprehend the good qualities they see in that buddhafield, and, having purified their own buddhafield, reside there obstructed by just a single birth. 
Twenty-eighth. Similarly, they reside establishing the buddhafield in the south. 
Twenty-ninth are those in the west.
Thirtieth are those in the north.
Thirty-first are those in the intermediate direction to the northeast. 
Thirty-second are those in the intermediate direction to the southeast. 
Thirty-third are those in the intermediate direction to the southwest. 
Thirty-fourth are those in the intermediate direction to the northwest.
Thirty-fifth are those in the direction below. 
Thirty-sixth are those in the direction above.
Thirty-seventh. They bring beings in the ten directions to maturity, please the buddhas of the ten directions, apprehend the special qualities they see in those buddhafields, and, having perfected their own buddhafield, abide there obstructed by just a single birth. 
Thirty-eighth. They are endowed with all the buddhadharmas and, through the force of earlier prayers that are vows, disguised as a buddha make many beings feel joy in their great miraculous productions, calm bearing, and refined faculties. Just through the force of that joy and delight they bring beings to maturity, causing them finally to gradually enter into complete nirvāṇa by means of the three vehicles. 
Thirty-ninth. Endowed with those same refined faculties, similarly, they work for the welfare of beings but do not praise themselves  and disparage others, staying focused by abiding in equanimity. 
Fortieth. They stand on the Pramuditā level, stand in the perfections of giving and morality, do not experience the suffering of destitution or the suffering of terrible forms of life, and until they reach the irreversible stage stay focused on the welfare of others. 
Forty-first. Focusing on the perfections of giving and morality, in all their lives they become wheel-turning emperors, and, through the power of their miraculous productions, gather beings together and establish them in giving and morality. 
Forty-second. Focusing on the perfections of giving and morality, similarly, in all their lives they become wheel-turning emperors and, endowed with the great force of their miraculous productions, stand pleasing and worshiping the buddhas of the ten directions. 
Forty-third. They abide in the six perfections and bring beings to maturity with all 
“the light of the buddhadharmas,”
and with this same light of the buddhadharmas cause themselves personally to mature, remaining
“up until they… fully awaken.” 
After having thus taught who the bodhisattvas are, it says,
“This, Śāriputra, is the origination of the bodhisattva great beings in the buddhadharmas.”
The meaning is that this is the sequence in the growth of the buddhadharmas that are the shoots of bodhisattvas.
 Then, to begin the explanation, the Lord, taking those bodhisattvas as the measure, says,
“Therefore, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom would provide no opportunity for basic immoral physical, verbal, and mental action.”
 Taking his cue from that, to begin the explanation the elder [Śāriputra] himself then asks, 
“What, Lord, is a bodhisattva great being’s basic immoral physical action?”
and so on. 
 Then the Lord, talking about the perception that apprehends a body, a voice, and a thinking mind, teaches that if it occurs to a bodhisattva to think, “This is the body with which I should undertake physical action, this is the voice, this is the thinking mind with which I should undertake the action,” then there is a fault in their undertaking.
 Just those are the physical, verbal, and mental bases of suffering. 
 Having thus taught that it is this nonapprehending body, voice, and thinking mind itself that cleanses the bases of suffering, it then teaches that also bodhisattvas standing on the Pramuditā level, if, practicing the ten wholesome actions, stop śrāvaka thought and pratyekabuddha thought and constantly attend to a greatly compassionate thought for all beings, then in that case too they would have thoroughly cleansed the bases of suffering. 
 Śāriputra asks,
“What, Lord, is the bodhisattva great beings’ awakening path?”
because
“cleansing the awakening path”
presented it as not different from the perfections. 
 Then, 
“Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings practice the awakening path,”
and so on, teaches that the awakening path is a yogic practice that does not apprehend anything. Then, in a subsection, it teaches the two parts of the awakening path: practice that does not apprehend anything and practice that does not falsely project anything. As for those two connected sections, the earlier practice is the cause of the later practice because, when they do not apprehend anything, they do not falsely project anything. 
 The elder [Śāriputra], thinking that just a tathāgata has the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, and a bodhisattva does not, asks, 
“What, Lord, is the bodhisattva great beings’ knowledge of a knower of all aspects?”
And the Lord, with
“in possession of that knowledge,” 
and so on, says that the type of bodhisattva knowledge produced on the eighth level is a natural knowledge, which is to say, a matured knowledge. The matured knowledge brings all the perfections and so on to completion, but still the attention to making an effort at them is not there. It is therefore called the knowledge of a knower of all aspects, having labeled the cause with the name of the result, because that knowledge is the cause of the knowledge of all aspects.
 Then the 
“flesh eye”
is the knowledge that engages with all forms; the 
“divine eye”
knows all meditative stabilizations and absorptions; the
“wisdom eye”
is knowledge of all-knowledge; the
“dharma eye”
is all nine knowledges with the exception of the knowledge of what can and cannot be; and the
“buddha eye”
is knowledge of the vajropama meditative stabilization. It teaches their division in that way. 
 Then, in regard to abiding with the clairvoyances, for all the clairvoyances it gives an earlier explanation of abiding with the clairvoyances as conventional knowledge, and afterward, to teach that they are absolutely complete, it teaches that as ultimate knowledge they are nonconceptual. To teach that they are absolute purity, conventional knowledge, having made all the abiding of bodhisattvas complete, afterward ultimately does not apprehend them and on account of that becomes absolutely “perfected” and absolutely “purified.”
Therefore at the end it says,
“Śāriputra, practicing the perfection of wisdom like that the six clairvoyances of bodhisattva great beings are perfected and purified, and those purified clairvoyances cause them to gain the knowledge of all aspects.”
“They do not apprehend a false projection of miraculous power,”
by a miraculous power.
“What they might falsely project,” 
a procedure that is the activity of miraculous power,
“or what might be falsely projecting,” 
knowledge of the activity of miraculous power—
“they do not apprehend”
those miraculous powers. 
“Its intrinsic nature is empty”
is the nonexistence of its intrinsic nature; 
“its intrinsic nature is isolated”
is absolute purity; and
“its intrinsic nature is not produced”
is the intrinsic nature of a compounded phenomenon.
“They do not intend miraculous power”
is the intention that thinks, “That is miraculous power”;
“[they] intend to accomplish miraculous power”
is the intention that thinks, “I am going to accomplish these miraculous powers.”
“Therefore, Śāriputra, there are bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who, standing in the perfection of giving, cleanse the path to the knowledge of all aspects based on not holding on to anything because of the emptiness that transcends limits.”
Whether they abide in all six of the nonconceptual perfections, or whether they abide in any one of the six perfections, they cleanse the awakening path. 
“Śāriputra, there are…,”
and so on, teaches their different inclinations. 
“Because of the emptiness that transcends limits”—
the extreme of over-reification and the extreme of over-negation have stopped. 
“Based on not holding on to anything”—
they do not settle down on the three spheres of giver, gift, and recipient and so on. Because of not holding on to anything, they therefore, 
“standing in the perfection of giving, cleanse the path to”
awakening.
“Based on not having gone, not having come—
having in mind those who think, “We have been told, ‘They cleanse the awakening path,’ so, if there is a path there must be coming and going,” it negates them, saying
“based on not…”
The Śrāvaka Vehicle says, “All dharmas are produced, but still they do not come from anywhere; they stop, but still they do not go anywhere.” In the Great Vehicle it is said, “Because there is no production and stopping,  there is liberation from coming and going.”
“And not having grasped anything”—
settling down on dharmas as dharmas is holding on to something;
“giving is designated based on holding on to things”—
miserliness is holding on to something. 
 What is the intention where it says “giving is designated based on holding on to things” and so on? 
 In the world miserliness exists and the word giving appears, and given that there is immorality and so on, morality and so on come about as words. This is explaining that since the bodhisattvas have no intellectual awareness of miserliness on the opposing side and so on, therefore they have no intellectual awareness of giving and so on either. 
“They do not falsely project ‘they have gotten beyond that.’ They do not falsely project ‘they have not gotten beyond that.’ ”
They do not think they “have gotten beyond” or “have not gotten beyond” miserliness and so on, because neither of those exist. 
“They do not falsely project ‘giving and miserliness’ ”
teaches just that, which is to say, they do not think there is either an opposing side or a counteracting side. 
“They do not falsely project ‘I have been snubbed.’ They do not falsely project ‘I have been saluted,’ ”
and so on, teach that they do not falsely project the eight worldly dharmas.
“Śāriputra, a nonproduction…”
means the very limit of reality. 
“In regard to all beings, that they are the same”
is immeasurable equanimity because of the emptiness of persons;
“that all phenomena are the same”
is the equanimity that is an abiding in the middle way because of the emptiness of dharmas, which is to say, it is “the equanimity free from attachment and hatred.”
 After that, the prophesy of those in the retinue who have been brought to maturity, the praise of the perfection of wisdom, the praise of bodhisattvas who have set out in the perfection of wisdom, the diffusion of the light, the assembly of the bodhisattvas,  the array of the offerings, the retinue that has reached the eighth level, the prayer that is a vow, and the prophesy are all topics that are obvious, as found in the Sūtra.
 This is how to explain the brief teaching of the first statement. 
 In respect to the exposition in eight parts of
“Here, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom,”
the Lord and the elder Śāriputra have expounded in detail
why bodhisattvas endeavor, how bodhisattvas endeavor, the defining marks of those who endeavor, andthose who endeavor.
Instructions for the endeavor
Now, of the four parts,
instructions for the endeavor, the benefits of the endeavor, 
and so on that now have to be explained, the elder Subhūti teaches the instructions for the endeavor. But it is actually the Lord teaching in that way, with skillful means to bring trainees to maturity, so it will say below,
“Śāriputra, it is just the Tathāgata who, by skillful means, will expound the perfection of wisdom to the bodhisattva great beings.”
 In regard to,
“Will venerable Subhūti instruct… on account of armor in which reposes the power of his own intellect and ready speech?”
śrāvakas know the objects of śrāvakas, so why would śrāvakas have such uncertainty [about his being such a great bodhisattva]? 
 There is nothing wrong with that, because the elder Subhūti is a bodhisattva great being who for immeasurable eons has accumulated stores of merit and wisdom, and is famous for having gained forbearance for the deep dharmas, so all have become uncertain like that. Therefore, to eliminate the fault which might occur were Subhūti to teach in his own words, which is that they might not be accepted, he emphasizes that they are the words of the Lord, not his own words. 
“Whatever the Lord’s śrāvakas say, teach, and expound”—
it indicates those three because, on account of the three types to be disciplined, there is a division into brief, intermediate, and detailed teaching; alternatively, it is because of the threefold surpassing aspiration for themselves, and the temporary, and contextually appropriate, surpassing aspiration for others.
 Now, in order to give an exposition of what is taught in the first statement, “bodhisattva great beings… should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom,” taking that as the point of departure, to set the scene,
The Lord… said…, “Subhūti, starting with the perfection of wisdom, be confident in your readiness to give a Dharma discourse to the bodhisattva great beings about how bodhisattva great beings go forth in the perfection of wisdom.”
The elder Subhūti, to himself set the scene for four instructions—
instructions for making an effort by using names and conventional terms conventionally,instructions for making an effort without apprehending beings,instructions for making an effort by not apprehending words for things, andinstructions for making an effort when all dharmas cannot be apprehended—
asks,
“Lord, … [w]hat phenomenon is this, the word bodhisattva great being, for?”
 There in the brief teaching, the Lord said “bodhisattva great beings,” but the phenomenon bodhisattva does not exist at all. And he also said “perfection of wisdom,” but the phenomenon perfection of wisdom does not exist at all. So, given that those two phenomena cannot be apprehended, Subhūti asks whom he should be instructing and advising about what. 
 Do not say that, the Lord says to Subhūti. If you therefore think there is nothing to say because a bodhisattva does not exist and even the perfection of wisdom does not exist, you deprive beings of what they need. It is therefore said, “Even though  those two dharmas  do not ultimately exist in their thoroughly established nature, you should take hold of their imaginary marks with skillful means in order to bring beings to maturity and so on, and give advice to beings in the perfection of wisdom in the conventional way. Otherwise, you will deprive beings of what they need.”
 First, the teaching instruction about designation is the passage that teaches up to,
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should thus understand names and conventional terms.”
Having thus given instructions in designation, ultimately what is designated has to be taught, so the Lord, asking a question, uses the elder [Subhūti’s] words,
“Lord, you say… ‘bodhisattva great being,’”
as his point of departure, framing a series of five questions with,
“What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva form, or is the bodhisattva other than form?”
and so on. Then the elder Subhūti’s words,
“Lord, when a bodhisattva great being absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could that form be a bodhisattva?”
and so on, teaches the instructions without apprehending beings. It is taught in the passage that goes up to, 
“Bodhisattvas, Subhūti, should train in the perfection of wisdom like that, without apprehending a being.”
 Then the Lord, again taking the words of the question,
“What phenomenon is this, the word bodhisattva, for?”
as his point of departure, asks,
“Subhūti… what do you think, is bodhisattva the word for form?”
and so on, and with,
“Lord, when a form absolutely does not exist  and cannot be apprehended, how could bodhisattva be the word for form?”
and so on, teaches not apprehending a word for the elder Subhūti’s word. Having done so, the passage from,
“Subhūti! … when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom like that they should train in the perfection of wisdom without apprehending a word for form,” 
up to
“should train in the perfection of wisdom without apprehending a word for wishlessness,”
teaches the instruction in the perfection of wisdom.
 Then the Lord, again having taken the words of the inquiry,
“I do not see that—namely, the phenomenon with the name bodhisattva,” 
as his point of departure, in the passages from,
“The Lord, Subhūti, does not see the dharma-constituent,”
and so on, up to the end,
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the perfection of wisdom like that, without apprehending all dharmas,”
teaches not apprehending all dharmas. Just that is the instruction. 
“That is the advice about the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattvas, just that is the instruction”
brings the four instructions to a conclusion.
Instructions for making an effort by using names and conventional terms conventionally
 Among these, for the instructions for using names and conventional terms conventionally spoken about first, having taught that a “name” in the form of some other phenomenon does not exist with
“those… are just words,”
with those words
“do not exist inside, do not exist outside, and they cannot be apprehended where both do not exist”
it explains the reason why a name in the form of some other phenomenon does not exist. Were some name in the form of some other phenomenon to exist, you would apprehend it as one from among the three—inner, or outer, or as other than those two. But, because when you investigate all three are untenable it therefore does not exist. Here, furthermore, 
“Subhūti, it is like this: the word being is uttered again and again, but you cannot apprehend any being,”
and so on, teaches by analogy. 
 Then it gives a second reason why a name in the form of some other phenomenon does not exist, with
“and except for being used conventionally as a mere word and conventional term, any phenomenon that is a designation is not produced and does not stop,”
and so on. Were the names of phenomena to exist in the form of some other phenomena, when the phenomena when names are spoken arise, they too would arise, but they do not arise. Thus, because they are suitable to work as conventional labels, through their operation as conventional terms they are later stated to others with, “This is its name.” 
 Were a name produced when the phenomenon itself is produced, others would then, right when they see it, even without knowing the conventional term, understand that “this is its name.” But they do not have that understanding, so, even though the phenomenon is produced the name is not produced, and even though the phenomenon stops the name does not stop. Even though something that is a name for something might cease, its working as a conventional label does not. Therefore, this teaches that it does not exist in the form of some other phenomenon because its production and stopping do not exist, but like a “self” and a “being” it is there simply as a convention. 
 Here, furthermore, by way of illustration, it starts with four types of things: 
“self, being,”
and so on, known from the śrāvaka system because they exist simply as a convention; the aggregates, constituents, and sense fields, known from the system of the bodhisattvas because they exist simply as imaginary phenomena; the 
“body”
and 
“grass,” 
and so on, that are particular inner and outer objects known from both because they exist simply as the names designated based on something; and a 
“dream, echo, mirage,”
and so on, known in all worlds are because they are totally nonexistent. 
 After that, to bring the instruction in name designation to a conclusion, it says,
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom  they should train in names and conventional terms that make things known, in advice that makes things known, and in dharmas that make things known.”
This speaks first about designation that is a name and conventional term, in order to avoid the extremes of over-reification and over-negation. It speaks about designation that is advice while remaining in that state, because they explain the doctrine in order to bring beings to maturity. Then, since they both designate the dharmas as conventional terms, it says they are imaginary dharmas. 
 Then, to teach the benefit of those three designations, it again says,
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom do not view ‘form is permanent,’ ”
and so on. This is explaining that the result of training in things being simply just designated is the elimination of all conceptualizations.
 Those conceptualizations of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, furthermore, are threefold:
those falling within the province of insight, those falling within the province of the three gateways to liberation, and those falling within the province of the perfect analytic understanding of the reality of dharmas. 
Among these, those falling within the province of insight are the conceptualizations summarizing the doctrine that serve as the foundation for the four noble truths based on the bright side and the dark side that are accepted and rejected: the conceptualizations of impermanence, suffering, selflessness, and calm, and the conceptualizations of permanence, pleasure, self, and not calm that are the side opposing those. 
 Those falling within the province of the three gateways to liberation are the conceptualizations of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness, and the conceptualizations of not being empty, having a sign, and being wished for that have to be eliminated. 
 All the rest fall within the province of the perfect analytic understanding of the reality of dharmas. These are the ten conceptualizations of the compounded, the arising, the not isolated, the unwholesome, being with basic immorality, being with outflows, the afflicted, the ordinary, defilement, and saṃsāra, and, serving as the side counteracting them, the ten conceptualizations of the uncompounded, the stopping, the isolated, the wholesome, being without basic immorality,  being without outflows, the unafflicted, the extraordinary, purification, and nirvāṇa. All of them, furthermore, fall within the province of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas because bodhisattvas have to eliminate them all totally. It teaches the elimination of those thirty-four conceptualizations as the benefit of training in phenomena just being simply designations. 
“They do not view… as existing in the compounded element or as existing in the uncompounded element.”
This is saying that the perfection of wisdom and so on are not counted as being a compounded phenomenon or an uncompounded phenomenon. 
 To teach that in true reality they do not mentally construct an expression of a bright and dark side as two, it says
“do not mentally construct… any of those dharmas.”
They do not, like the tīrthikas and so on, 
“conceptualize,”
in particular, that something is permanent, is a pleasure, or has a self and so on, and they do not, like the śrāvakas and so on, with their insight and so on, 
“mentally construct,”
in particular, that something is impermanent, suffering, and selfless and so on. 
 Thus, to teach that the training of bodhisattvas is in a form that counteracts all such mental construction and conceptualization, it says,
“Standing without mentally constructing any dharma they cultivate the applications of mindfulness,”
up to the end, 
“the distinct attributes of a buddha.”
 In order to teach the actually real state of dharmas that serves as the object when there is no conceptualization, in a form that counteracts the object of śrāvakas, it says, 
“[Bodhisattva great beings] practicing the perfection of wisdom  excellently realize the defining marks of the dharmas. And that defining mark of a dharma, of the dharmas, is not defiled and is not purified.”
This teaches that suchness is naturally pure, so, during the period when there are stains it is not defiled. During the period when there are no stains, there is no purification of what has been plucked out of thin air. Therefore, because it remains always in such a state it is called tathatā.
 Therefore, it is saying about those in the above explanation that they are all imaginary phenomena, they are not actually real, are not the truth.
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings are thus practicing the perfection of wisdom they should understand the conventional usage of dharmas that are names and conventional terms.”
When just those mentally constructed dharmas are taught, its result is not settling down on all dharmas, so,
“having understood that they are [just] names and conventional terms that are dharma designations, they do not settle down on form,”
and so on, teaches the second benefit. It means having thus become aware that all dharmas are simply just designations they do not settle on any imaginary phenomenon—form and so on, up to, at the end, 
“the skillful means”
for the sake of the purification of the buddhadharmas. 
“They do not settle down on suchness. They do not settle down on the very limit of reality. They do not settle down on the dharma-constituent.”
In the order spoken about before, what falls within the province of the knowledge of the aspects of the paths incorporated in the levels of bodhisattvas is called suchness; the nirvāṇa that falls within the province of the all-knowledge of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas is the very limit of reality; and the dharma body included in the Buddha level that falls within the province of the knowledge of all aspects of the buddhas is the dharma-constituent.
After that the benefit of cultivating not settling is again taught in the passage from,
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom who do not settle down on all dharmas grow in the perfection of giving,”
and so on, up to the end:
“They will obtain the dhāraṇī gateways. They will obtain the meditative stabilization gateways.”
Instructions for making an effort without apprehending beings
 Having thus completed the instruction for designations that are conventional terms, there has to be an explanation of the second, the instruction without apprehending beings. So first, from the elder Subhūti asking,
“Lord, you say… ‘bodhisattva great being,’ ”
there arises, on account of that inquiry, the thought that “something called a bodhisattva exists,” so, in order to remove the doubt of someone who thinks, “Subhūti said that,” the Lord poses a fivefold question: 
“What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva form, or is the bodhisattva other than form, or is the bodhisattva in form, or is form in the bodhisattva, or is the bodhisattva without form?”
Seizing on a bodhisattva as a being and mentally constructing it as different, like a soul and so on, the possibilities are threefold: controller of itself and the other; a residence and resident; something other than those. Thus, when a bodhisattva is settled down on as a being it can be supposed to be just the entity that is the five aggregates as the nihilists have falsely imagined the self to be; or it can be a self that is something quite other, not included in the five aggregates, as the eternalists have falsely imagined the self to be.
 There, taking the position that they are the same as its point of departure, it says,
“Is the bodhisattva form…  or is the bodhisattva feeling… or is the bodhisattva perception…?”
and so on.
 Second, taking the position that they are different as its point of departure, it says,
“Is the bodhisattva something other that is not form, … is the bodhisattva something other that is not feeling…?”
and so on. 
 Furthermore, having taken the second possibility of a residence and resident as its point of departure, it says,
“Or is the bodhisattva in form, or is form in the bodhisattva… or is the bodhisattva in feeling, or is feeling in the bodhisattva…?”
and so on. The idea is that form and feeling and so on, and a bodhisattva, are totally unconnected, because a bodhisattva is totally other than them. 
 Having taken the third possibility as its point of departure, it says,
“Or is the bodhisattva without form… or is the bodhisattva without feeling…?”
and so on. 
 Thus, when an analysis of this bodhisattva has been made, the bodhisattva does not withstand analysis as being the same or different, or a residence or resident, or as something that is the nonexistence of those. Therefore, intending that the bodhisattva does not exist, it says,
“None of those, Lord.”
 Among those who assert a soul, there are some for whom “a discriminating seeing has everything as its object,” who mentally construct a being that is in the nature of an eye sense faculty and so on. Thinking what is called a being has form as its intrinsic nature, they think the soul is 
“one who sees.”
Therefore, it says, 
“What do you think… is the bodhisattva form?”
and so on. 
 Similarly, those like cowherds and so on who mentally construct an enjoyer as a being,  and, having taken it as having feeling for its intrinsic nature, think the soul is 
“one who feels.”
Therefore, it says,
“What do you think… is the bodhisattva feeling?”
 Similarly, those like Jains and so on mentally construct a doer as a being, and, having taken it as having perception and volitional factors for its intrinsic nature, think the soul is
“one who does.”
Therefore, it says,
“What do you think… is the bodhisattva perception… is the bodhisattva volitional factors?”
 Similarly, those like the Vaidikas and so on mentally construct one who knows as a being, and, having taken it as having consciousness for its intrinsic nature, think the soul is 
“one who knows.”
Therefore, it says,
“What do you think… is the bodhisattva consciousness?”
 Similarly, those like the Sāṃkhyas mentally construct it as an extremely subtle 
individual that is pervasive but not evident, thinking that there is a soul that has a nature different from form and so on. Therefore, it says,
“What do you think… is the bodhisattva other than form? What do you think… is the bodhisattva other than feeling?”
and so on. 
 Similarly, those like the Parivrājakas and so on mentally construct it as the size of a thumb or the size of a grain of barley and so on. They mentally construct the idea that this individual resides in a body constituted out of aggregates. Therefore, it says,
“What do you think… is the bodhisattva in form? What do you think… is the bodhisattva in feeling?”
and so on. 
 Similarly, those like the Ulūkas and so on, who assert that impermanent form and so on are resident in the permanent person, think that form and so on reside in the soul, mentally constructing something in the residence. Therefore, it says,
“What do you think… is form in the bodhisattva? Is feeling in the bodhisattva?”
and so on. 
 Similarly, like certain of those who assert Īśvara and so on, they mentally construct an extremely subtle, very hard to understand “Īśvara” as existing, and mentally construct the idea  that it is different from the intrinsic nature of form and so on. Therefore, it says,
“What do you think… is the bodhisattva without form? What do you think… is the bodhisattva without feeling?”
Intending that all those possibilities fly in the face of reason, the question is posed separately taking the five aggregates, six elements, twelve sense fields, and twelve links of dependent origination as the point of departure, and the elder Subhūti replies in the negative to each, with,
“None of those, Lord.”
 Then if a dharma that is different exists and if this bodhisattva supposes it has to be a compounded phenomenon or an uncompounded phenomenon, if it is a compounded phenomenon it will be apprehended in these aggregates and so on, but it is not apprehended; and even if it is asserted that it is an uncompounded phenomenon, to eliminate that doubt, taking the suchness of the aggregates and so on as his point of departure, the Lord asks,
“What do you think, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva the suchness of form?”
Then, were the different and combined suchnesses of aggregates, constituents, sense fields, and dependent origination, having been collected, together to exist in a bodhisattva, just a single bodhisattva would have an unbounded, infinite number of intrinsic natures. Something like that makes no sense, so the elder Subhūti negates those as well, with,
“None of those, Lord.”
The Lord then asked
again the reason why, with
“Subhūti, for what reason do you say…?” 
and it says the reason why, with, 
“Lord… when a bodhisattva absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could that form be a bodhisattva?”
and so on. This means that just like conceiving of a rabbit’s horns or the child of a barren woman as tall or short, or snow white  or jet black, given that a being absolutely does not exist, form and so on that is a compounded phenomenon in its intrinsic nature, or suchness that is an uncompounded phenomenon in its intrinsic nature, does not exist. 
“How could the suchness of form be apprehended in it?”
means how could it have the suchness of form as its intrinsic nature. 
 Having thus negated all intrinsic natures, to bring the instructions without apprehending a being to a conclusion it says,
“Excellent, excellent, Subhūti!” said the Lord. “Bodhisattvas, Subhūti, should train in the perfection of wisdom like that, without apprehending a being.” 
Instructions for making an effort by not apprehending words for things
 Then, in the context of the noble elder Subhūti first asking about a “word for something,” with,
“What phenomenon is this, the word bodhisattva, for?”
where the Lord has also taught as though a bodhisattva existed, some think that even if, ultimately, bodhisattvas are taken to lack an intrinsic nature of the aggregates and so on, still, they do exist from a conventional perspective as having what has been labeled onto the aggregates and so on as their intrinsic nature. Therefore, to teach that even that designation does not exist, after that, taking the words of the question as his point of departure to teach the instructions by not apprehending words for things, the Lord asks,
“What do you think, Subhūti, is bodhisattva the word for form? Or do you think bodhisattva is the word for feeling?”
and so on. Were a word for something to be the bodhisattvas’ intrinsic nature then the words for the five—form and so on—and the fourteen—permanent and impermanent and so on—would become their intrinsic nature. Therefore it asks, having taken the word for each of them separately, “Do you think bodhisattva is the word for form? Do you think bodhisattva is the word for feeling?” 
 Then, given that form and so on are absolutely nonexistent because they are imaginary phenomena, how could words for them be apprehended? If words for things are not apprehended, how could there be a bodhisattva? Thus, the elder Subhūti teaches that words for things do not exist, and bodhisattvas do not exist with the words for them as their intrinsic nature. 
 Then, based on the fact that they do not apprehend words for things,
“Excellent, excellent, Subhūti!” said the Lord. “Bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that, Subhūti, should train in the perfection of wisdom without apprehending a word for form,”
up to
without apprehending the words for… consciousness is… a pleasurable state, a suffering state, self, selflessness, calmness, noncalmness, emptiness, nonemptiness, the state of having a sign, signlessness, the state of being wished for, or wishlessness,” 
is the instruction by words for things.
Instructions for making an effort when all dharmas cannot be apprehended
 Having thus taught that a “bodhisattva” does not ultimately, or even conventionally, exist, then, in order to teach the instructions when all dharmas cannot be apprehended, that not only does a bodhisattva not exist, but all dharmas do not exist either, the Lord sets the scene by taking the words of the elder Subhūti’s earlier question:
“Again, Subhūti, you say…”
Earlier, the elder Subhūti, with, 
“I do not see that—namely, the phenomenon bodhisattva,”
has said he does not see a phenomenon called “bodhisattva,” teaching that nobody, ultimately, sees anything at all. 
 Then, the Lord again, in order to teach that ultimately, during the non-thoroughly established period when nobody sees anything at all and nothing else sees that either, says,
“Subhūti, the dharma does not see the dharma-constituent;  the dharma-constituent does not see the dharma,”
and so on. The idea is that a falsely imagined dharma does not see a thoroughly established dharma-constituent, and a thoroughly established dharma-constituent does not see a falsely imagined dharma either. To teach just that it says,
“Subhūti, the form constituent does not see the dharma-constituent,”
and so on. 
 Then, when they are different, as the reason for that, it also says,
“And why? You cannot make the uncompounded known without the compounded, and you cannot make the compounded known without the uncompounded.”
If compounded dharmas and uncompounded dharmas were to be different, in that case one might be seen by the other, but there are no separate “uncompounded phenomena” at all for compounded phenomena. So, it is just suchness itself called “a compounded phenomenon” during the impure period, and just that itself called “an uncompounded phenomenon” during the purified period. This is just like previously murky water that has later become clear—it is just that water itself—and like the sky earlier spotted with clouds and so on that has later become spotless—it is just that sky itself. Similarly, with previously impure suchness—when it has become totally purified it is still just that suchness, so compounded dharmas and uncompounded dharmas do not have different intrinsic natures. Therefore, just as a self does not itself see itself, so too a falsely imagined dharma does not see a thoroughly established dharma-constituent, and a thoroughly established dharma-constituent does not see a falsely imagined dharma either. That is what it means.
 To teach the benefit of this practice when all dharmas cannot be apprehended it says,
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that  do not see any dharma at all, but they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified at not seeing; their minds are not cowed by any dharma, do not tense up, and do not experience regret.”
The result of this practice when all dharmas cannot be apprehended is also an increase in faith and an increase in wisdom. With an increase in faith “they do not tremble” and so on; with an increase in wisdom their minds do not sink down and become disenchanted. That faith, furthermore, is especially for three objects: it is felt for the explanations of the deep doctrine, the achievement of what is extremely difficult to do, and the totally amazing, marvelous buddhadharmas. This means that when faith in those three objects increases, the trembling and so on that arise from an absence of faith do not occur, and the cowed mind that arises from the absence of knowledge of just those three profound objects does not occur. 
 There they are said to “tremble” when it is slight, when it first happens; said to “feel frightened” when it is middling; and said to “become terrified” when it is huge. Connect the feeling of disenchantment with the three time periods like that as well. 
 Then, they 
“do not see form”
and so on is a detailed teaching of just that—of dharmas that cannot be apprehended. It teaches all the dharmas: the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, links of dependent origination,
“greed, hatred, and confusion;”
the thirteen— 
“a self, a being, and a living being,”
and so on;
“the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm;”
and
“śrāvakas and śrāvakadharmas… pratyekabuddhas and pratyekabuddhadharmas… bodhisattvas and bodhisattva dharmas … buddhas and buddhadharmas… and awakening.”
 The aggregates, constituents, sense fields, and links of dependent origination incorporate all inner and outer dharmas; “greed, hatred, and confusion” incorporate all on the side of defilement and the basis of suffering; “a self, a being,” and so on incorporate the totally nonexistent designation dharmas; the three realms incorporate all the dharmas in the cycles of existence; and “śrāvakas” and so on incorporate all bright purification dharmas. 
“Mind and mental factor dharmas”
incorporate the six engaging consciousnesses and the foundation consciousness, and what are associated with them, and 
“thinking mind and thinking mind dharmas”
teach the afflicted thinking mind and what is associated with it. 
Benefits of the endeavor
Having thus completed the fifth, the instructions for the endeavor, to teach the sixth, the benefits of the endeavor, it gives an exposition in a long passage of the text, from,
“Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend form should train in the perfection of wisdom,”
and so on, up to
“because in this perfection of wisdom there is detailed instruction for the three vehicles in which bodhisattva great beings should train on the level of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas.”
 Again, here there are four benefits:
comprehension of the dharmas that have to be comprehended;elimination of those that have to be eliminated;perfecting in meditation those that have to be perfected; anddirect witness by reaching those that have to be directly witnessed.
Among these,
“Lord, bodhisattva great beings who want  to comprehend form,”
and so on, teaches the benefit of comprehension, because this passage teaches that they should comprehend the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, and the links of dependent origination. 
“Who want to eliminate greed, hatred, and confusion”
teaches the benefit of elimination because this passage teaches that they should eliminate greed, hatred, and confusion, views, and the ten unwholesome actions. The benefit of perfecting is the passage teaching that they 
“complete the ten wholesome actions… the perfections,”
and so on, up to
“the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.”
And the benefit of directly witnessing is the passage teaching that they 
“obtain the dhāraṇi gateways and meditative stabilizations.”
 Then it teaches two more benefits: it teaches the benefit that they
“fulfill all the intentions of beings”
and that they
“complete all the wholesome roots.”
These two are also just those characteristic of the perfecting spoken about earlier. They are taught last because they set the scene for the big flaw.
“The big flaw”—
this is called “the big flaw” because it is the head or main fault, or because it is the flaw during the peaked period characterized by special insight. 
“A conforming love for dharmas”—
this is “conforming” because it is in the form of the cause that eliminates error. It is “love for dharmas” because it is together with the mental construction of them as dharmas.
“Form a persistent negative attachment to the notion”—
wrong view together with mental construction is “negative attachment” when it is big; the mind is “persistent” when it is middling; and discrimination causes “the notion” when it is small. These three dharmas are in conformity with error: with erroneous discrimination, erroneous mind, and erroneous view.  It also teaches that there is love for two sorts of dharma: the true dharmic nature of the perfect view of reality, and the true dharmic nature of practice.
 The locution 
“flawlessness”
connotes an absence, because the thing that is the flaw does not exist, hence “flawlessness.”
“Do not see in inner emptiness outer emptiness”—
inner emptiness is empty of the intrinsic nature of inner emptiness; it has not been made empty of the other emptinesses, outer emptiness and so on. So this means that an outer emptiness is not to be sought for in inner emptiness in order to make it empty.
 Similarly, 
“And… in outer emptiness inner emptiness”—
this means it is not sought for in order to make it empty, because it is an emptiness of its own intrinsic nature. 
“Train so that they know form but do not falsely project anything because of it”— 
this means that they know that all dharmas are empty of their own intrinsic natures and are merely just names, and with the knowledge that they are merely just names they do not falsely project anything. It explains like that up to
“the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha,”
and then teaches the thought of awakening together with its good qualities, with bodhisattvas
“do not falsely project anything even because of the thought of awakening.”
“Because that thought is no thought”—
take the word “thought” as imaginary thought. It says it “is no thought” because the thoroughly established—the unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening thought in the form of the dharma body—transcends everything marked by mental construction and conceptualization, and hence does not have the mark of a thought. Therefore, it says
“the basic nature of thought is clear light,”
that is, the nature of the thought that is the dharma body is clear light. So, it “is no thought” means that it is no imaginary thought. 
“A thought that is not conjoined with greed nor disjoined from greed”
teaches just the basic nature, clear light. Even during the earlier period when greed and hatred  and so on arise in an ordinary person, like space, because it is not sullied by any stains, it is “not conjoined.” Later, even when a buddha, because that thought is separated from the afflictive emotions plucked out of thin air and abides in its natural purity, those stains have absolutely not arisen, and so, like space that is not conjoined with clouds and so on, it is clear light and hence “not disjoined” either. This is saying that it is not the case that it was conjoined earlier and later became disjoined, because, since it is naturally pure even during the earlier period when it is together with stains, it is not conjoined with them, and therefore later as well it is not disjoined from them either. 
“Venerable Subhūti, the thought of which you say ‘it is no thought,’ does that thought exist?”
What does he have in mind? He inquires thinking like this: When the elder Subhūti said “because that thought is no thought,” even then he gave expression to the word “thought,” so that thought would come to exist with the mark of thought.
 Then the elder Subhūti, having in mind, “I am not saying the mark of thought or the mark of no thought exists. It is not right to say, when talking about an absolute purity established as being inexpressible in its nature as being different, that it is something different, so I am saying ‘thought’ and ‘no thought’ through the force of prior usage,” inquires of him,
“Venerable Śāriputra, can you apprehend existence or nonexistence there, in that state of no thought?”
He intends to say that when it is no thought you cannot say it either exists or does not exist, because that would be resorting to two extremes. Therefore it says,
“No, Venerable Subhūti.”
 Then the elder Subhūti, because it is not suitable to express it at that time in either way because of the danger posed by the two extremes,  again asks why he asks that: 
“Is then… this argumentative investigation of yours… appropriate?”
 After he has said that, Śāriputra, thinking that if he is saying it neither exists nor does not exist then even the mark of no thought does not exist, so why does he say it is no thought, counters,
“Venerable Subhūti, what is the state of no thought?”
 Then the elder Subhūti thinks: I am not saying to him “no thought,” having in mind a mark of no thought in some other form. It has to be called “thought” during the earlier period when it is together with stains, because it has distortion and conceptualization, and, because something like that does not exist— “no thought” having asserted the mere nonexistence of the thing called “thought.” In order to teach that, he says,
“Venerable Śāriputra, the state of no thought is a state without distortion and without conceptualization,”
by which he means that the nonexistence of something that has distortion and conceptualization—like thought during the earlier period—is “no thought.” 
 When he says that, the elder Śāriputra, wondering if during that period it is only thought that is without distortion and without conceptualization, or whether all dharmas are without distortion and without conceptualization, asks
“Venerable Subhūti, just as thought is without distortion and without conceptualization, so too is form without distortion and without conceptualization?” 
Then the elder Subhūti explains that the buddhadharmas up to
“unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening are without distortion and without conceptualization as well.”
“The Lord’s son, close to his bosom”—
children born miraculously, in that they are born from their father’s heart, are called “children close to his bosom.” Alternatively, take this as the foremost child. So  this elder, in that he is a son born from the heart-mind, is “close to his bosom,” because he has come about from attention to calm abiding and special insight. He is
“born from his mouth,”
because he has come about from explanations of the doctrine;
“born from his Dharma,”
because he has come about from Dharma practice;
“magically produced from his Dharma,”
because he is born from path, result, and realization Dharma; 
“his Dharma heir,”
because he takes ownership of nirvāṇa—the Dharma;
“not heir to material possessions,”
because he has eliminated craving; 
“a direct eyewitness to the dharmas,”
because he is not captured by anything other than the true nature of dharmas; and
“who witnesses with your body,”
because he has attained the form and formless absorptions and has witnessed the dharma body.
 He is
“foremost of those who are at the conflict-free stage.”
In the śrāvaka system the meditative absorption that discourages harmful words is called the conflict-free meditative absorption. Because he is at that stage he is called “at the conflict-free stage.” Here, all conceptual thought construction is called “conflict.” Because all of that is absent, the nonconceptual meditative absorption is called without conflict. Because he is at that stage he is called “at the conflict-free stage.” 
 Then the elder Śāriputra causes delight by praising with 
“excellent!” 
and so on, teaches that a bodhisattva engaged in such an endeavor is irreversible from achieving awakening, and, having set forth all training at the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha level, and at the Bodhisattva level as benefiting this perfection of wisdom, rejoices in the fact that
“in this perfection of wisdom is detailed instruction for the three vehicles,”
bringing the benefits of the endeavor to a conclusion.
Subdivisions of the endeavor
Having thus taught the benefits of the endeavor,  there has to be an explanation of the subdivisions of the endeavor for those who wonder about the endeavor’s many aspects, so from here on there is an explanation of six practices that cause going forth. The six practices that cause going forth are 
practice free from the two extremes,practice that does not stand,practice that does not fully grasp,practice that has made a full investigation,practice of method, andpractice for quickly fully awakening.
The Lord himself also teaches that these sorts of practices cause going forth when he sums up in conclusion with
“those bodhisattva great beings stand on the irreversible level by way of not taking their stand on it and will go forth to the knowledge of all aspects and will be near the knowledge of all aspects,”
and so on. It teaches each of the six in its own place below.
Practice free from the two extremes
Now, the elder Subhūti, in order to set the scene for these six practices, says,
“Lord, given that I do not find, do not apprehend, and do not see a bodhisattva or the perfection of wisdom, to which bodhisattva will I give advice and instruction in what perfection of wisdom?”
and so on. This is a fourfold teaching of a bodhisattva and the perfection of wisdom, as well as of a person who is suitable to be given instruction in what cannot be apprehended by the three valid cognitions governed by direct perception, inference, or conclusive teaching, and a perfection of wisdom that is a suitable instruction. Thinking that he does not see them, so, as to what person should they be construed, he poses the question in the passage ending with “give advice and instruction in what perfection of wisdom?”
 Then, since no real thing suitable to be the instructions can be apprehended with the three valid cognitions either, “this”—the instruction in an unreal dharma by an unreal dharma—“really” makes him “uneasy,”  which is to say, thinking he is unable to give instruction in a dharma that cannot be apprehended he thus teaches the passage from, 
“Lord, given that I do not find, do not apprehend, and do not see any real basis…—Lord, while not finding, not apprehending, and not seeing any real basis, which dharma will advise and instruct which dharma?”
ending with
“this really is something I might be uneasy about.”
Here do not take “uneasy” as mental regret; “uneasy” is about a thing done badly. He intends, “It would be a fault because I would not have understood.”
 Again, persons and dharmas that are real things do not exist when presented as in the explanation of the instruction above; therefore, having taken them as simply just names, how could the persons and the dharmas wax and wane? With that thought he makes this statement:
“Because, Lord, given that I do not find, do not apprehend, and do not see all dharmas, this really is something I might be uneasy about, how I might make just the name bodhisattva and just the name perfection of wisdom wax and wane.”
“Wax” is the over-reification of what does not truly exist; “wane” is the over-negation of what does truly exist.
 Then, in order to teach that even those very names are not real things, he says,
“Lord, furthermore, that name does not stand alone and does not meet up with anything. And why? It is because that name does not exist.”
“Does not stand alone” means a compounded dharma thus does not stand; “does not meet up with anything” means that an uncompounded dharma like space and so on does not stand.
 After teaching like that, Subhūti, in order to further teach that, having seen every other dharma freed from the extremes of over-reification and over-negation, he does not see anything that could be labeled with the names bodhisattva or perfection of wisdom,  says,
“Lord, given that I do not apprehend and do not see the waxing and waning of form,”
and so on. Our own Lord Buddha and the tathāgatas together with their śrāvaka saṅghas and bodhisattva communities in as many world systems in the ten directions as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River teach the suchness of all the dharmas: the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, six contacts, six feelings, and six elements; the links of dependent origination; greed, hatred, and confusion; obsessions, obscurations, proclivities, fetters, and views; a self, a living being, a creature and so on (the thirteen); all the perfections; all the emptinesses; the dharmas on the side of awakening, gateways to liberation, four concentrations, four immeasurables, and formless absorptions; the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha; morality; giving away; the gods; disgust at what is included in the body; breathing in and out; death; the five eyes, six clairvoyances, ten powers, four fearlessnesses, four detailed and thorough knowledges, eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, and five appropriating aggregates that are like a dream, illusion, mirage, city of the gandharvas, echo, apparition, reflection in the mirror, and magical creation; isolation, calm, nonproduction, nonstopping, nonappearing, not occasioning anything, nondefilement, and nonpurification; suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element; the wholesome and unwholesome,  basic immorality and not basic immorality, with outflows and without outflows, with afflictions and without afflictions, ordinary and extraordinary, compounded and uncompounded, defiled and purified, and saṃsāra and nirvāṇa dharmas; and the past, future, and present. 
 What is the difference between the terms
“suchness, unmistaken suchness,”
and so on? They are differentiated because the referent of the thoroughly established differs. 
 Here the mark of the thoroughly established is ninefold:
the thoroughly established that is indestructible,the thoroughly established without error,the thoroughly established that does not alter,the thoroughly established that is the nature of things,the thoroughly established that is the state causing all purification dharmas,the thoroughly established that is constant,the thoroughly established that is irreversible,the thoroughly established that is true reality, andthe thoroughly established beyond the path of logic.
 The thoroughly established that is indestructible is called suchness, because it always stays just like that without being destroyed. 
 The thoroughly established without error is called unmistaken suchness because it is without mistakes and is not a form of error. 
 The thoroughly established that does not alter is called unaltered suchness because it does not change.
 The thoroughly established in its intrinsic nature is called the true nature of dharmas because it is the mark that all dharmas share—having emptiness for their intrinsic nature.
 The thoroughly established that is the cause of all purification dharmas is called the dharma-constituent because it is the constituent and cause of all the buddhadharmas—the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, and so on.
 The mark of the thoroughly established that is constant is called the establishment of dharmas because it remains constantly, because it says,
“Whether the tathāgatas arise or whether they do not arise this true nature of dharmas simply remains.”
 The thoroughly established that is irreversible is called the certification of dharmas because by breaking through to the first level on up one goes forth to a state in which perfection is certain because one will have gone forth to perfect, complete awakening—to flawlessness. 
 The thoroughly established that is true reality is called the very limit of reality because it reaches its limit in reality, in the true reality that is without error. 
 The thoroughly established beyond the limit of logic is called the inconceivable element because it is inexpressible, self-reflexive analytic knowledge beyond the scope of all inference.
 Furthermore, all imaginary phenomena are
like a dream
because they are not like that when awakening has happened. The opposite of those is called suchness, because suchness exists at all times. 
 All dharmas are like
an illusion
because they are mistaken appearances, so the opposite of those is called unmistaken suchness, because it is an unmistaken nature. 
 All dharmas are like
a mirage
because while they are one thing they look like something else, so the opposite of those is called unaltered suchness because it does not ever change.
 All dharmas are like
a reflection of the moon in water
because, while that is not the actual nature of that phenomenon, it appears as that phenomenon’s actual nature, so the opposite of those is called the true nature of dharmas, because it is the nature of the ultimate. 
 All dharmas are like
a city of the gandharvas
because they are meaningless. The opposite of those is called the dharma-constituent because it is the cause of the buddhadharmas and is meaningful. 
 All dharmas are like 
an echo
because they are fleeting. The opposite of those is called the establishment of dharmas because its mark is lasting.
 All dharmas are like 
an apparition
because they have a nature that is not fixed. The opposite of those is the certification of dharmas because its nature is fixed.
 All dharmas are like
a reflection in the mirror
because they are a transference of consciousness. The opposite of those is the very limit of reality because it is the ultimate.
 All dharmas are like
a magical creation
because they are karmically created by mind. The opposite of those is the inconceivable element because it is beyond the entire scope of the thinking mind. 
 Ultimately these are all synonyms of the thoroughly established. 
 Having eliminated over-reification and over-negation by teaching that you cannot apprehend the waxing and waning of all phenomena, to teach that a name cannot be apprehended, he says,
“Lord, whatever this designation bodhisattva that is a conventional term for the true nature of dharmas is, it cannot be said to be aggregates, or constituents, or sense fields,”
and so on. This teaching is in two parts.
 The subsection of the passage saying “it cannot be said to be… at all” teaches that a name is not included in the collection of dharmas—the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, and so on. The subsection of the passage saying “cannot be said to be anything” teaches not being included in the true dharmic nature of 
“wholesome or unwholesome or neutral, basic immorality or not basic immorality,”
and so on. 
 The subsection of the passage saying “cannot be said by anything at all” teaches by saying the names for 
“dream, illusion, mirage, city of the gandharvas, echo, apparition, a reflection in the mirror, and magical creation,”
which are absolutely nonexistent but still are renowned in the world; for
“space, earth, water, fire, and wind,”
which are renowned as having the mark of just conceptualized phenomena; for
“suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, true nature of dharmas, dharma-constituent, establishment of dharmas, certification of dharmas, and very limit of reality,”
which are renowned as having the mark of the thoroughly established; for all the perfections that are renowned as the true dharmic nature of bodhisattvas; for
“morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation,”
all of which are renowned as the true dharmic nature of śrāvakas; and for 
“stream enterer, once-returner, non-returner, worthy one, and pratyekabuddha”;
and for
“stream enterer dharmas,”
and so on; and for
“bodhisattva, bodhisattva dharmas… and buddha, and buddhadharmas.”
 Then, at the end of just that practice free from the two extremes, again, in conclusion, to teach going forth, the passage, up to the end, says,
“You should know that bodhisattva great beings stand on the irreversible level by way of not taking their stand on it and will go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
Practice that does not stand
Having thus given the names and taught the dharmas of the practice free from the two extremes, after that, to teach the practice that does not stand, it says, 
“Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in form,”
and so on. 
 It also teaches this practice in two parts: not standing in dharmas and not standing in the true nature of dharmas.
 Among these,  not standing in dharmas is the passage from where it says 
“should not stand in form,”
up to,
“Because of this one of many explanations, Lord, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom they should not stand in syllables.”
 Not standing in the true nature of dharmas is the passage from where it says,
“Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should not stand in ‘form is impermanent,’ ”
and ending with
“and therefore do not fulfill the perfection of wisdom and go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 At the end of listing the dharmas within the context of explaining the practice free from the two extremes, it says
“[they] stand on the irreversible level by way of not taking their stand on it and will go forth to the knowledge of all aspects.”
Because it says “by way of not taking their stand,” it should be taken as a segue to the category of the practice that does not stand. 
 Now an explanation has to be given that lists the dharmas within the context of explaining all the practices that do not stand, so, having taught that they do not stand in the five aggregates, with
“[they] should not stand in form; they should not stand in feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness,”
it then, taking form as its point of departure, also gives the reason why they do not stand in each of them separately, with,
“Lord, it is because form is empty of form… that emptiness of form is not form, and emptiness is not other than form. Form itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is form.”
 The intention is as follows: Earlier it said that they “should not stand in form,” and it said that it is “because form is empty of form.” There are three types of form: falsely imagined form, conceptualized form,  and the true dharmic nature of form. 
 Among these, the form ordinary foolish beings take to be defined as an easily breakable or seeable real thing is imaginary form.
 The aspect in which just that appears as real as an object of consciousness is conceptualized form.
 Just the bare thoroughly established suchness separated from those two falsely imagined and conceptualized form aspects is the true dharmic nature of form. It is 
“empty”
because it is empty of the definitions—being seeable and so on—of imaginary phenomena, and of any form conceptualized as a form appearing in the aspect of an object.
 When this is said, someone might entertain a doubt, thinking that that which is the true dharmic nature of form empty of the imaginary form and conceptualized form might have a definition of form that is quite other, and it might then also be called “form.” It therefore says
“that emptiness of form is not form.”
This means the suchness empty of imaginary and conceptualized form that is the true dharmic nature of form marking the thoroughly established does not have form for its intrinsic nature because it is totally isolated from form aspects.
 When this is said, someone might entertain a doubt, thinking that if form is totally nonexistent, well then, that of which it is empty is called “emptiness,” and without the object there is no emptiness, so, a true dharmic nature that is other than a dharma is not tenable, and a dharma that is other than a true dharmic nature is not tenable either. It therefore says
“and emptiness is not other than form.”
What does this teach? It means that just as water that is not clear is called “dirty” when it is not clear, and “clear water” when it is clear, and just as space is called “cloudy” when it is not clear,  and “clear space” when it is clear, similarly with this emptiness. In nonpure contexts you use the word “form” and so on for it, in order not to be different from ordinary fools, and in pure contexts you call it “emptiness.” Therefore the dharmas, form and so on, that are different from emptiness do not exist. Because a difference between dharmas and the true nature of dharmas does not exist, when you set forth a dharma as the true dharmic nature 
“form itself is emptiness, and”
when you have set forth the true dharmic nature as a dharma 
“emptiness itself is form.”
 Alternatively, in
“form itself is emptiness, and emptiness itself is form,”
take emptiness as suchness, as the true dharmic nature of form. 
 Thus, it says
“they should not stand in form,”
because it is not suitable for them to stand in imaginary and conceptualized forms that are absolutely nonexistent, and it is also not suitable for them to stand in thoroughly established form. 
 Similarly, connect this with 
“feeling”
and so on.
“Should not stand in syllables”
and so on—they should not stand in seed syllables.
“Should not stand in syllable accomplishment”—
the term “syllable accomplishment” is used for the production of the knowledge of anutpāda (“nonproduction”) after resorting to the seed syllable a, and so on, used as a dhāraṇī. This teaches that they should not stand there either. That dhāraṇī knowledge is a product of such explanations as
“a is the door to all dharmas because they are unproduced from the very beginning.”
 That statement, furthermore, becomes a condition for full awakening when certain bodhisattvas with sharp faculties resort to the single statement and enter into the meaning of nonproduction. It happens when those with middling faculties resort to two syllables and have become familiar with two statements.  Many statements become a condition for full awakening when those with dull faculties resort to them and have become familiar with them. Hence it says
“should not stand… in a single explanation, in two explanations, or in a number of different explanations.”
 Also, in the subsection of the passage about not standing in the true nature of dharmas, it says
“form that is impermanent is empty of the intrinsic nature of form that is impermanent.”
The impermanence of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas is marked by production and cessation, that is, is marked as a falsely imagined phenomenon. The nonexistent thing that is the meaning based on the bodhisattvas’ definition of impermanence is said to be “the meaning of impermanence.” Thus, existing permanently is called permanence. A permanently nonexistent thing, being nonexistent at all times, the opposite of that, is said to be the bodhisattvas’ impermanence. Hence it is saying that impermanence is ultimately marked by nonexistence. “Form that is impermanent is empty of the intrinsic nature of form that is impermanent”: that true reality, the ultimately “impermanent” of the bodhisattvas, is “empty of the intrinsic nature of the impermanent” marked by production and cessation that is conceptualized by śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. 
“And why?” It says,
“Also, that which is the emptiness of form that is impermanent is not the impermanence of form.”
This means that that which, ultimately, is the true reality that is the impermanence of form is not the intrinsic nature of the impermanence of imaginary form, and therefore the ultimate impermanence of form is empty of the impermanence of imaginary form. 
 To those who think, “In that case the true nature of a dharma is different from the dharma,” it says
“and form that is impermanent is not other than emptiness.”
This means that there is no impermanence of a falsely imagined form other than suchness, like clean water and space.
 Because they are not different, it says
“and emptiness itself is form that is impermanent.” 
The idea is that emptiness is a word to convey the emptiness of form that is impermanent. 
 Connect this in the same way with all the rest.
Practice that does not fully grasp
Having thus taught practice that does not stand, to teach the faults of standing, it says,
“Furthermore, Lord, when bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom without skill in means stand in form with a mind that has descended into grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine,’ they practice an enactment of form, and they do not practice the perfection of wisdom,”
and so on. It means if, “without skill in means”—which is to say if, having incorrectly grasped dharmas without knowing that they are characterized as something that does not exist—they “stand in form,” and think, “I am, in my basic nature, form,” or “this form is me,” or “it is defined as being seeable,” then they “practice an enactment of form,” that is, a karmically formed phenomenon that ensues when there is the conception of form, “not the perfection of wisdom” that follows emptiness. 
 To teach the faults of practicing an enactment, it says
“practicing an enactment [they] do not cultivate the perfection of wisdom,”
and so on. 
 To those thinking, “Why, without such skill in means, when practicing an enactment of form and descending into grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine,’ do they not attain the practice of the perfection of wisdom, and not attain the definite emergences by becoming absorbed in and completing the yogic practice that does not fully grasp?” it says,
“It is because, Lord, form is not fully grasped,”
and so on. 
 This is the “practice that does not fully grasp.” It teaches this practice in three parts as well:
not fully grasping dharmas, not fully grasping causal signs, and not fully grasping understanding.
 Among these, the subsection explaining not fully grasping dharmas is from
“form is not fully grasped, and…,”
and from
“that knowledge of all aspects is not fully grasped, because of inner emptiness,”
up to
“because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.”
 The subsection on not fully grasping causal signs starts from,
“And why? Because it cannot be expressed as a causal sign,”
and goes up to
“having thus comprehended he did not fully grasp form, did not fully grasp feeling,” 
and up to
“did not fully grasp the very limit of reality.”
 The subsection of the passage on not fully grasping understanding is from,
“And why? Because he did not apprehend a grasper of all dharmas that are empty of their own mark,”
up to,
“Lord, because all dharmas are not fully grasped, it is the bodhisattva great being’s perfection of wisdom.”
Not Fully Grasping Dharmas
 There, first, in the subsection explaining not fully grasping dharmas, in regard to
“form is not fully grasped,”
because of the self, the true dharmic nature of form—whatever the cause of a descent into grasping at “I” and grasping at “mine”—is not grasped as form. Therefore, it teaches that when an enactment is practiced, it is not a practice practicing the ultimate perfection of wisdom. “And why” is form not fully grasped? It says,
“Because a form not fully grasped is not form, because of the emptiness of a basic nature.”
Here, take “not fully grasped” with the mark of a thoroughly established phenomenon. It is saying that the true dharmic nature of form that is not fully grasped, which is the intrinsic nature of a thoroughly established phenomenon, is not a falsely imagined form’s intrinsic nature. Therefore, the true dharmic nature of form is connected with “is not fully grasped.” 
 “Because of the emptiness of a basic nature” means it is not the case that, having fully grasped some aspect of an attribute of form and so on earlier, later some other counteracting force will make it empty. Its basic nature is emptiness.
 Construe from “feeling” and so on, up to “the very limit of reality,” like that as well.
“Lord, this meditative concentration sphere of bodhisattva great beings is called sarva­dharmāparigṛhīta; it is vast, prized, infinite, fixed, cannot be stolen, and is not shared in common with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas”
teaches its dharma.
“Abiding in that sphere of meditative stabilizations”
and so on teaches the benefit.
“And that knowledge of all aspects is not fully grasped, because of inner emptiness,”
up to
“emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature,”
is teaching that because the completion of the thoroughly cleansed transcendental knowledge of all the emptinesses when all dharmas are not apprehended is “the knowledge of all aspects,” therefore it too is “not fully grasped.”
 Therefore, it says
“it cannot be expressed as a causal sign.”
This means that even the knowledge of all aspects is separated from the causal sign of the knowledge of all aspects because it definitely does not have a mental image of a causal sign.
“Because a causal sign is an affliction”—
the very causal signs of the bodhisattvas’ conceptualizations afflict the mindstream, so they are taught to be “affliction.” 
Not Fully Grasping Causal Signs
The subsection on not fully grasping causal signs also explains in terms of these, so it says,
“What is a causal sign? Form is a causal sign,”
and so on. It means that they are all, ultimately, afflictions for bodhisattvas so they should be abandoned, but not like attachment and so on. 
“If the perfection of wisdom  were something that could be taken up through a causal sign, then the religious mendicant Śreṇika,”
and so on, is an elucidation of the practice without causal signs.
“The religious mendicant Śreṇika also believed in this knowledge of a knower of all aspects.”
Earlier, that religious mendicant had not realized the practice without causal signs. He had generated a faith in it, and with just that faith he produced and gained knowledge free from causal signs, but because all dharmas were not its object it was not the knowledge without causal signs.
“Partial knowledge”—
having comprehended dharmas, each individually, he did not apprehend the causal sign of form when he had fully grasped and understood form analytically. Similarly, he did not apprehend the causal sign of feeling when he had fully grasped and understood feeling analytically. Hence it says, 
“Having thus comprehended [he] did not fully grasp form. Similarly, he did not fully grasp feeling, perception, volitional factors, or consciousness,”
up to
“he has not fully grasped even the very limit of reality.”
 To teach the reason for that, it explains
“because he did not apprehend a grasper of all dharmas that are empty of their own mark.”
By having comprehended with that signless knowledge each of them individually in the form of signlessness, he comes to understand that all dharmas are empty of their own mark. Hence “he did not apprehend” a person or knower that is “a grasper.”
 Also, as a reason for that it says,
“Because he did not see that knowledge as being an inner attainment and clear realization of knowledge, and he did not see it as being an outer one. He did not see that knowledge as being an inner and outer attainment and clear realization, and he did not see that attainment and clear realization of knowledge as being some other either.”
This means that religious mendicant, having taken hold of his knowledge and fully investigated the attainment and the realization—whether with this knowledge of his he had attained special dharmas he had not attained before,  or whether the dharmas he had clearly realized with this knowledge had not been clearly realized before—did not see the knowledge as located in him, located outside, located in both, or located somewhere else besides those. Hence it says
“because he did not apprehend and did not see that with which he might know, or that which the knowledge might know.”
There the “that with which” is teaching “that knowledge with which.” The “that which” is teaching “that which he has attained and clearly realized.” The “that which” is also teaching the dharmas he has not attained and has not clearly realized.
Not Fully Grasping Understanding
 Having thus taught that knowledge of attainment and clear realization does not exist as any of the four alternatives, then, in order to teach that knowledge of all dharmas—form and so on, which are objects—also does not operate as any of the four alternatives, it says
“he did not see that knowledge inside form,”
and so on. It means that he also did not see the knowledge of all dharmas—form and so on, which are objects—inside, outside, in both, or somewhere else. 
 To again elucidate just that, it says,
“The religious mendicant Śreṇika believed in this one of many explanations,”
and so on, up to
“because he did not pay attention to any causal signs.”
This teaches the benefit of this comprehension of practice that does not fully grasp. 
“Lord, this—… the state in which the bodhisattva great beings have gone beyond the others; it is the perfection of wisdom.”
This means it is thus a beyond that is different from all other dharmas, which has become different from all conceptualizations and all causal signs. The absence of conceptualization is the beyond in the sense that signlessness is the “beyond.” 
 What is that which is beyond the others? It says
“that he does not fully grasp form,”
and so on. Because he does not fully grasp form and so on, he is therefore “beyond the others.”
“In the interim they do not pass into complete nirvāṇa.”
That religious mendicant Śreṇika is in the buddha lineage so in the interim he does not pass into nirvāṇa. As for saying “in the interim,” it says
“those prayers are nonprayers, those powers are nonpowers, those fearlessnesses are nonfearlessnesses, those detailed and thorough knowledges are nondetailed and nonthorough knowledges, up to those eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha are nonbuddhadharmas,”
so this “in the interim” teaches they are beyond the others. 
Practice that has made a full investigation
Having thus made fully complete the practice that does not fully grasp, next, taking the practice that has made a full investigation as its point of departure, it says,
“Furthermore, Lord, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should make an investigation like this,”
and so on. 
 This practice that has made a full investigation is taught in four parts as well: 
“What is it… of what is it… why is it… and what is it for?”
 From
“if, when they investigate and ponder like that,”
up to
“thus, practicing the perfection of wisdom… are not separated from the knowledge of all aspects,”
teaches the “what.” 
 From
“Venerable Śāriputra, form is separated from the intrinsic nature of form,”
up to
“the very limit of reality is separated from the intrinsic nature of the very limit of reality,”
teaches the “of what.”
 From
“furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, form does not have the defining mark of form,”
up to
“bodhisattva great beings who are training in this training go forth to the knowledge of all aspects,” 
teaches  the “why.” 
 From
“all dharmas have not been produced and have not gone forth,”
up to
“Venerable Śāriputra, a bodhisattva great being thus practicing the perfection of wisdom is near unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,”
teaches the “what it is for.”
 There, “what is it” is a question about its basic nature. There the perfection of wisdom should be described as a realization. 
 “Of what is it” is a question about what it is connected with. There it should be described as a realization of all dharmas. 
 “Why is it” is a question about the reason it is the perfection of wisdom. There it should be said it is because it is a realization marked by the state of things as they really are. 
 “What is it for” is a question about function. There it should be said it is because it causes an escape.
 It says
“when they investigate and ponder”
the responses that have to be made to all those 
“like that”—
as in the response to the above question “what is it?”—
“if… they see that the dharma that does not exist and that they do not find is the perfection of wisdom they still do not see it.”
If they thus see that the dharma that does not exist and is not found is the perfection of wisdom, that too is not seeing.
What does this intend? It means that at that time even the intrinsic nature of all dharmas that cannot be apprehended is like space, so, when that which has viewed it is a seeing without an intrinsic nature, it is a perfect seeing.
 Therefore, it says
“because, Lord, all dharmas do not exist and are not found.”
It means during that period.
When the elder Subhūti says
“you should know”
that those who, when they see that all dharmas, form and so on, are not real things, 
“are not cowed… and do not tremble,”
and so on, are not separated from the knowledge of all aspects, the elder Śāriputra, to teach the mark of nonseparation,  asks,
“Venerable Subhūti, why should you know that they are not separated from the knowledge of all aspects?”
At that point the elder Subhūti says that because all dharmas are separated from an intrinsic nature, therefore 
“you should know”
that those who see that this is so
“are not separated from the knowledge of all aspects.”
 With,
“Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, form does not have the intrinsic nature of form,”
and so on, he answers the question “of what” is it the perfection of wisdom? Given that all dharmas are not real things because they are separated from an intrinsic nature, what dharmas does it then realize so that it is taught to be “the perfection of wisdom”? 
 From,
“Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, form does not have the defining mark of form,”
up to those
“who are training in this… go forth to the knowledge of all aspects,”
teaches why it is a perfection of wisdom. It is posited as “the perfection of wisdom” because it realizes the marks of all dharmas. This is teaching that if all dharmas have no marks and are separated from marks, what are the marks it realizes? It is saying because all marks are falsely imagined, are nonexistent, therefore the true nature of dharmas is separated from the mark of form and so on. 
 From,
“Venerable Subhūti, do bodhisattva great beings training in this training go forth to the knowledge of all aspects?”
up to,
“Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings thus practicing the perfection of wisdom are near unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening”
teaches what this perfection of wisdom is for. It is a “perfection of wisdom” because it causes an escape.  That escape, furthermore, is not to all dharmas, 
“because all dharmas have not been produced and have not gone forth.”
Hence it is also teaching that it also does not cause an escape. 
“Venerable Śāriputra… form is empty of form. You cannot get at its production and going forth.”
This means that because the thoroughly established true dharmic nature of form is empty of the intrinsic nature of falsely imagined form, therefore there is no production and going forth of a defiled nature during the period of saṃsāra, and no mistaken entity exists in the purified nature during the purified period. Hence a going forth plucked out of thin air does not exist, because in its intrinsic nature it is purity, and the true nature of dharmas does not change. It 
“has not been produced”
during the period when it has stains, and it 
“has not gone forth”
during the period when it is stainless. 
Practice of method
Having thus taught the practice that has made a full investigation, next, to teach the practice as perseverance is the passage from where it says,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom without skillful means practice form,”
and so on, up to the end:
“Śāriputra… they… bodhisattva great beings… are close to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 This practice as perseverance is also taught in two parts: the lack of method that has to be eliminated, and the method that has to be resorted to. The lack of method is explained in two parts as well: the practice of causal signs, and the practice of enactment. The method to be resorted to is also explained in two parts: not practicing dharmas, and not practicing the causal signs of dharmas. 
 Among these, the practice of causal signs because of lacking method is from
“if… without skillful means [bodhisattva great beings] practice form they practice a causal sign;  they do not practice the perfection of wisdom,”
up to where it says,
“You should know that this is the bodhisattva great beings’ lack of skillful means.”
 The practice of enactment because of lacking method starts from where it says
“possess, form a notion of, and believe in form,”
and is up to,
“Venerable Śāriputra, you should know that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom like that are without skillful means.”
They “possess” because of mental error, “form a notion” because of perceptual error, and “believe” because of philosophical error.
 For the practice of method, the practice without apprehending dharmas starts from where it says,
“Venerable Śāriputra… when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom they do not practice form,”
and goes up to, 
“Venerable Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom like that you should know that they have skillful means.”
 I have already explained “the emptiness of form is not form” and so on above, so there is no need to repeat the explanation here. 
 In the practice of method, practice without apprehending the causal signs of dharmas starts from where it says,
“If, while practicing the perfection of wisdom they apprehend any dharma, they are not practicing the perfection of wisdom,”
and goes up to
“[those] bodhisattva great beings… are close to the knowledge of all aspects.”
 There, connect the four alternatives that
“they apprehend… they do not apprehend… they apprehend when they apprehend and do not apprehend when they do not apprehend… and they neither apprehend nor not apprehend”
with causal signs; and construe these four this way:
“ ‘I am practicing,’… ‘I am not practicing,’… ‘I am practicing when I am practicing  and not practicing when I am not practicing,’ and… ‘I am neither practicing nor not practicing’ ”
with causal signs as well.
“The perfection of wisdom is without an intrinsic nature and cannot be found”—
at the thoroughly established stage all dharmas cannot be apprehended, so even the perfection of wisdom does not exist on account of the perfection of wisdom’s own intrinsic nature. 
Practice for quickly fully awakening
Having thus taught the practice of perseverance, now, with
“furthermore… that knowledge of all aspects is not two and cannot be divided into two,”
and so on, it teaches the practice for quickly fully awakening. This practice is also taught in four parts:
training in the meditative stabilization spheres,training in not apprehending all dharmas,training in the illusion-like and so on, andtraining in skillful means. 
 Among them, the training in meditative stabilizations starts from
“because all dharmas are things that are not real, that knowledge of all aspects is not two and cannot be divided into two,”
and goes up to
“one should train in the applications of mindfulness.”
 Training in not apprehending all dharmas is taught in the passage starting from where it says,
“Śāriputra, when bodhisattva great beings train like that in the perfection of wisdom,”
and
“they train in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, by way of not apprehending anything,”
and so on, up to the end:
“Śāriputra, they go forth to the knowledge of all aspects by way of not apprehending emptiness.”
 Training in the illusion-like and so on is taught in the passage starting from where it says,
“Lord, suppose someone were to ask, ‘Does this illusory being, having trained in the perfection of wisdom, go forth to the knowledge of all aspects or reach the knowledge of all aspects?’ ”
up to,
“Because, Lord, form is like an illusion, and feeling … perception… volitional factors… and consciousness is like an illusion, and what that consciousness is, the six faculties are. They are the five aggregates.”
 Skillful means is taught in the passage starting from where it says,
“Subhūti… if they are bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle, and are those without skillful means who have not been taken in hand by a spiritual friend,”
up to
“someone… Subhūti, they should know is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being.”
Training in the meditative stabilization spheres
Among these, training in meditative stabilizations is taught in two parts: an explanation of the names and an explanation of nonconceptualization. 
 Among these, in regard to the explanation of names, it first teaches meditative stabilization in the form of nonproduction with,
“Furthermore, because all dharmas are things that are not real, that knowledge of all aspects is not two and cannot be divided into two,”
and so on. Construe “knowledge of all aspects” as the stage when all dharmas are not two, because for all imaginary dharmas there is bifurcation into grasped-object and grasper-subject, exist and does not exist, real thing and unreal thing, eternal and annihilated, compounded and uncompounded, dharma and nondharma, and so on, as well as into permanent and impermanent, pleasure and suffering, having a self and selfless, calm and not calm, empty and not empty, having a sign and signless, wished for and wishless, and so on. All those pairs are falsely imagined phenomena, and because they do not exist in the knowledge of all aspects it says the “knowledge of all aspects is not two.” A real twofold thing arrived at through realization does not exist, so it says “cannot be divided into two.”
 Having taught abiding in meditative stabilization by giving the names of the meditative stabilizations, then, to teach abiding in nonconceptual meditative stabilization, it says
“those… do not even see those meditative stabilizations, because they do not falsely project on account of those meditative stabilizations, ‘I have been absorbed,’ ”
and so on. They “do not even see meditative stabilization” because it is the meditative stabilization at the thoroughly established stage when all dharmas have become just suchness. 
Because the falsely imagined “I will be in meditative equipoise” and so on are totally nonexistent, the threefold conceptualizations based on time periods of them as meditative stabilization and of oneself in meditative equipoise, and the conceptualization of entering into absorption and conceptualization do not exist. Therefore, it says,
“Those bodhisattva great beings do not conceive of those.”
And just because of that it says, 
“The perfection of wisdom is not one thing, the meditative stabilization another, and the bodhisattva yet another. Bodhisattvas themselves are the meditative stabilization, and the meditative stabilization itself is the bodhisattva.”
It says that because all dharmas have the same nature as mere suchness. And just because of that, it says
“because all dharmas are the same.”
“Is it possible to teach the meditative stabilization?”—
which is to say, is it possible to differentiate them and describe it? He asks, thinking that in that case the bodhisattvas themselves would be the meditative stabilizations. In order to explain that the mark of a meditative stabilization is not different it says, 
“No indeed, Venerable Śāriputra.”
 Then the elder Śāriputra, wondering why, if the names of the meditative stabilizations do not exist, their names were given,  asks,
“Do they form a notion of those meditative stabilizations?”
He is asking, “Like śrāvakas do?” Then, because such mental construction does not exist, venerable Subhūti says, 
“They do not form such notions.”
 Then, because the explanation of the meditative stabilizations has been taught in one explanation and the activity taught in another, Śāriputra asks,
“How do they not form such notions?”
 Then, because the meditative stabilizations and their functions exist with a falsely imagined nature but cannot be apprehended when the marks of the falsely imagined have been eliminated, Subhūti therefore says,
“They do not mentally construct them.”
Then, to eliminate the thought of “mine,” it says
“because all phenomena do not exist.”
 Thus, take the “conflict” in
“taught to be the foremost of śrāvakas at the conflict-free stage”
as conceptualization. Freedom from all thought construction, absorption into the nonconceptual, is absorption into “the conflict-free.” Hence the Lord confers an 
“excellent!”
on the nonconceptual state.
Training in not apprehending all dharmas
Having thus given an exposition of the training in meditative stabilization, to teach training in not apprehending it says,
“Śāriputra… training like that… up to they train in the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, by way of not apprehending anything,”
and so on. 
 To teach training in not apprehending, it gives an exposition of not apprehending persons with, 
“Śāriputra, because of the state of absolute purity they do not apprehend a self,” 
and so on. It then gives an exposition of not apprehending all dharmas, with
“aggregates, constituents, sense fields,”
and so on, teaching
“they do not apprehend a stream enterer,”
and so on, up to
“a buddha.”
As for 
“because of the state of absolute purity”
they all have, having taken the completion of purification to be serving as a cause, in order to inquire about its intrinsic nature he asks,
“Lord, what is purity?” 
The Lord, to teach that the stainless, thoroughly established suchness is purity, says,
“Śāriputra, not being produced, not stopping, not being defilement, not being purification, not appearing, not being apprehended, and not occasioning anything is called the purity of all dharmas.”
Earlier, during the period when suchness has stains, all dharmas are produced and stop, are defiled and purified as falsely imagined phenomena. The produced comes into being and, having come into being, it is apprehended like this and like that, occasioning things like this and like that. During the period when there are no stains, in each and every way, the production of all dharmas in that suchness is nonexistent. Because there is no production, there is no stopping; because there are no stains there is no defilement, no purification, and no appearing; because there is no appearing there is no apprehending; and because there is no apprehending, there is not occasioning anything. This is called “absolute purity.” 
“Do not train in any dharma”—
because bodhisattvas do not see all dharmas during the period when there are no stains, it says
“those dharmas do not exist in the way foolish, ordinary people take them to be.”
 To teach that marked as being falsely imagined they are nonexistent it says,
“Śāriputra, as they do not exist, so do they exist.”
 To teach that they exist in the inexpressible form of a falsely imagined thing that does not exist it says,
“Thus, they do not exist, so one says ignorance.”
This means that like dream consciousness it is not in its nature a state of perfect reality. Even while not there, it causes grasping at other things that do not exist. Alternatively, it does not know perfectly, which is to say, it causes imperfect knowledge and understanding, hence it is “ignorance.” 
 Śāriputra asks,
“Lord why  are the nonexistent called ignorance?”
and it says,
“Śāriputra, form does not exist,”
and so on. Here is what it intends: even though dharmas are thus nonexistent and unreal, they are grasped as if they really exist, so they are not known perfectly, which is to say are not understood perfectly, so it is “ignorance.” To teach that, the Lord says the dharmas, “form” and so on, do not exist. 
 To make just this meaning clear it says,
“Those foolish people [who] settle down on them because of ignorance and craving… are attached to the two extremes.”
It means having settled down on the aspect of existence through the power of ignorance and having settled down by way of relishing the experience through the power of craving, they become “attached to the two extremes,” 
“permanence and annihilation.”
“They do not know, and they do not see”—
that is to say, they do not understand with inferential or direct perception, or else on account of the force of scripture or the force of their own personality. 
 This is in three parts, where it lists the dharmas in the context of explaining:
they have come about rooted in ignorance, they have come about rooted in thought construction, and they have come about rooted in the absence of faith.
 There, the first section explains that having grasped dharmas as existing where they do not exist because of the power of ignorance, and through the power of relishing the experience because of craving, having fallen into the two extremes, fools “do not know and do not see.”
 The second section explains they thus do not know and see, therefore mental constructions multiply. Mentally constructing dharmas not for what they are and settling down on them, mentally constructing them at the two extremes, they “do not know and do not see.” Because they do not know and see all dharmas
“they are, therefore, counted as fools. They will not definitely emerge.”
 The third section similarly explains that even though they have heard about them for what they really are, “they do not place their faith” in that reality, so, because they do not abide in serene confidence “they do not rest” in the perfections; and because they do not rest in the practice they do not attain the dharmas to be realized,  such as becoming irreversible from awakening and so on. So
“they are, therefore, counted as fools,”
as ordinary people, because of the fault of settling down on all dharmas.
 Having been taught that those like that do not train in them and do not go forth, there is the question,
“Why… do they… not train… and not go forth?”
And it says they “do not train” because 
“without skillful means they mentally construct and settle down on”
all the perfections and all the practice dharmas; and they “do not go forth” because they mentally construct and settle down on the dharmas on the side of awakening and so on, up to
“the knowledge of all aspects.”
It also says that practicing those same perfections without apprehending all dharmas is named having entered into the training, and not apprehending the knowledge of all aspects, and the dharmas, up to, the emptiness of all dharmas is going forth. 
Training in the illusion-like 
Having thus explained the training in not apprehending all dharmas, to teach training in the illusion-like and so on, it says,
“Lord, suppose someone were to ask,”
and so on. Here this is what venerable Subhūti is thinking: “Lord, if they practice without apprehending anything then there are no dharmas. And were they to go forth having trained in dharmas that do not exist, well then, even a totally nonexistent illusory person acting out an illusion with illusory attention that cannot be apprehended would, having trained, go forth and accomplish the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Then, in the first section explaining illusion, the Lord says: Just as there is no training in, or going forth to, illusory dharmas, similarly for bodhisattvas  there is no training in the dharmas, form and so on, or going forth to them, or definitely reaching the knowledge of all aspects. To teach that they are like an illusion he asks,
“Subhūti, what do you think about this: Is illusion one thing and form another?”
and so on. And to teach that bodhisattvas skilled in the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, who see that all dharmas cannot be apprehended, do not see falsely imagined dharmas like form and so on as existing apart from being illusions, there is the passage that ends,
“Illusion is not one thing, Lord, and the knowledge of all aspects another; the knowledge of all aspects is itself illusion, Lord, and illusion is itself the knowledge of all aspects.”
It is saying that because all are in their intrinsic nature falsely imagined, they are, as the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, undifferentiable from illusions.
 Similarly, the second section explaining illusion says that because
“production… stopping… defilement and purification”
do not exist there is no training in all illusions and dharmas that absolutely do not exist, no going forth, and no reaching the knowledge of all aspects. 
 Then it teaches that if the name bodhisattva is not said relative to the aggregates and so on, up to the distinct attributes, in that case, just like an illusory person, a bodhisattva does not exist; and because there is no production, stopping, and so on of the dharmas—from the aggregates and so on, up to the distinct attributes—they too, like illusions, do not exist, and names, conventional terms, and so on do not exist either, so how can totally nonexistent bodhisattvas train in totally nonexistent dharmas? How can they go forth, and how can they reach  the knowledge of all aspects? Then in conclusion it says that when they
“train… like that, by way of not apprehending anything, they go forth to the knowledge of all aspects and reach the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Thus, because of the nonexistence that is their intrinsic nature, those five aggregates are like a dream… an echo… an apparition… a reflection in a mirror… a magical creation… and a mirage, and because of just that the six sense fields are too, so a “bodhisattva” does not exist at all, because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of its intrinsic nature.
Training in skillful means
Having thus taught the training in the illusion-like and so on, to set the scene for training in skillful means it says,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle were to hear this exposition would they not tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified?”
And then it explains that
“those without skillful means who have not been taken in hand by a spiritual friend, they will tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified, but those with skillful means will not tremble and become terrified.”
And it says,
“Lord, what skillful means do bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle have not to tremble, feel frightened, and become terrified when they hear this exposition?”
Thus, it gives an exposition of skillful means.
 I have explained the meaning of “tremble, feel frightened” and so on before.
 Those skillful means are also explained in four parts:
skillful means of the analytic understanding of all dharmas,skillful means of completing the six perfections,skillful means of relying on a spiritual friend, andskillful means of shunning a bad friend.
Among these, starting from
“[they] analytically understand about form its impermanent aspect, but do not apprehend it,”
up to
“you should know that this is the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom,” 
teaches the skillful means of the analytic understanding of all dharmas.
 Starting from,
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects,”
up to
“Subhūti, you should know that this is the skillful means of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom,”
teaches the skillful means of completing the six perfections. Among them, giving expositions of Dharma by way of not apprehending anything is the perfection of giving; stopping śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha thoughts by way of not apprehending anything is the perfection of morality; forbearance and admiration for the deep dharmas is the perfection of patience; paying attention to not apprehending anything and not giving up analytic understanding is the perfection of perseverance; not providing an opportunity for unwholesome dharmas that are impediments to awakening is the perfection of concentration; and the analytic understanding of emptiness is the perfection of wisdom. 
“Form is not empty because of the emptiness of form”—
the true dharmic nature of “form” does “not” become “empty” out of thin air “because of” being caused by “the emptiness of” falsely imagined “form,” because it is empty of an intrinsic nature. Therefore, it says
“form is itself emptiness, emptiness is itself form.”
This means emptiness and the true dharmic nature of form are the same intrinsic nature. 
 Starting from,
“Subhūti, the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings,”
up to
“they, Subhūti, are the spiritual friends of bodhisattva great beings. If they have taken them in hand they do not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified when they hear this exposition,”
teaches the skillful means of relying on a spiritual friend. 
 After that,  the section of the text on false projections when apprehending things is included right with this, because it happens due to not having spiritual friends.
 Starting from,
“How should you know you have been taken in hand by spiritual friends?”
up to,
“Subhūti, they should know [that] is a bad friend of a bodhisattva great being, and knowing that, should shun them,” 
teaches the skillful means of shunning a bad friend.
Specific instruction for coming to an authoritative conclusion about this exposition
Part One: The twenty-eight [or twenty-nine] questions
Having thus differentiated and taught the passages to do with the inquiry into the endeavor’s many aspects, now the passages to do with the inquiry into specific instruction for coming to an authoritative conclusion about this exposition will be explained. 
 There, the initial statement,
“Here, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom,”
which set the scene for the initial brief exegesis, now sets the scene here too. The specific instruction for coming to an authoritative conclusion, furthermore, is twofold: about the meaning of the words and about the characteristic marks. In it there are twenty-eight questions:
What is the meaning of the word bodhisattva?What is the meaning of the term great being? How are they armed with great armor?How have they set out in the Great Vehicle? How do they stand in the Great Vehicle?How is it a great vehicle?How have they come to set out in the Great Vehicle? From where will the Great Vehicle go forth? Where will that Great Vehicle stand?Who will go forth in this vehicle?It surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. Is that why it is called a great vehicle?That vehicle is equal to space?  The Great Vehicle is in harmony with the perfection of wisdom?Why does one not apprehend a bodhisattva at the prior limit, the later limit,  and in the middle? Why does one have to know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness? Why does even such an idea as “a bodhisattva is form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness” not exist and why is it not found? I, who thus do not see and do not find a bodhisattva great being as anyone at all in any way at all—to which bodhisattva great being will I give advice and instruction in which perfection of wisdom? One says this, Lord, that is, “bodhisattva.” Is it just a word? One says “self” again and again but it has absolutely not come into being? Given that all dharmas thus have nonexistence for their intrinsic nature, what is that form, up to what is that consciousness?Form has not come into being?Does what has not come into being give advice and instruction in a perfection of wisdom that has not come into being? You cannot apprehend a bodhisattva other than one who has not come into being? One should know that when the mind of a bodhisattva great being given such instruction is not cowed, does not tense up, and does not experience regret, does not tremble, feel frightened, or become terrified, then that bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom? What is a bodhisattva? What is the perfection of wisdom? What is it to investigate? The nonproduction of form and so on is not form and so on? A decrease in form and so on  is not form and so on?Anything called “form” and so on is counted as not two? 
Thus the topics that emerge from those twenty-eight questions, and then the section of the text incorporating the hum of probing questions and responses by the two elders Śāriputra and Subhūti that goes up to the beginning of the Śakra Chapter, should be known as the specific instruction for coming to an authoritative conclusion.
1a. What is the meaning of the word bodhisattva?
There, where it says,
“Subhūti, the meaning of the word bodhisattva is an absence of a basis in reality,”
bodhisattva has four ultimate meanings: awakening, a being, the conventional bodhisattva constituted out of aggregates, and the ultimate bodhisattva. Because all four are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the meaning of the word bodhisattva is “an absence of a basis in reality.” Construe “absence of a basis in reality” as an impossibility. 
 Were bodhisattva to have something real for its nature, the word for it would have a basis in reality and it would become a possibility, whereas awakening, a being, and both bodhisattvas do not exist, so the meaning of the word bodhisattva is the absence of a basis in reality, that is to say, an “impossibility.” 
 To separate the parts of this same topic it says,
“Subhūti, it is because bodhi and sattva are not produced. Awakening and a being do not have an arising or an existence. They cannot be apprehended.”
Awakening does not arise because it is an uncompounded phenomenon, and because a being does not exist it does not arise either. Therefore it should be construed as: “Subhūti, awakening does not have an arising” and “a being does not have an existence that can be apprehended.”
 Then, to explain the locution “meaning of the word” it says,
“Subhūti, awakening has no basis in reality and a being has no basis in reality.” 
And it sums up in conclusion with,
“Therefore, a bodhisattva’s basis in reality is an absence of a basis in reality.”
 Then, to teach that the meaning of the word bodhisattva is an absence of a basis in reality it gives an elevenfold explanation:
“To illustrate, Subhūti, the track of a bird in space does not exist and cannot be apprehended,”
and so on: that
awakening does not have a basis in a reality constructed in thought;the basis of a falsely imagined “heroic being” does not exist at all;a basis other and separate from awakening does not exist;a basis separate from a conventional bodhisattva does not exist;a basis of the true dharmic nature of a bodhisattva does not exist;a basis for a heroic being does not exist in awakening;a basis for awakening does not exist in a heroic being;a basis in reality for “awakening” does not exist;the meaning of the word for the true dharmic nature of a “bodhisattva” does not exist in a falsely imagined bodhisattva;the meaning of the word for the falsely imagined “bodhisattva” does not exist in an unreal bodhisattva; and a basis for an ultimate bodhisattva does not exist. 
 Among these, to teach that awakening does not have a basis in a reality constructed in thought it says,
“To illustrate, Subhūti, the track of a bird in space does not exist and cannot be apprehended,”
and so on. This means that just as birds go through the sky but their tracks are not left there, similarly thought constructions move through awakening that is constituted out of suchness but do not remain there. 
 Then to teach that the basis of a falsely imagined bodhisattva does not exist in reality it says,
“To illustrate, Subhūti, in a dream a basis does not exist and cannot be apprehended,”
and so on. This means that a dream, an illusion, a mirage, an echo, an apparition, a reflection in a mirror, and a magical creation have no basis in reality because they are totally nonexistent.  Similarly, bodhisattvas also have no basis in reality because they too do not exist. 
 Then to teach that a basis other than awakening does not exist it says,
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, in suchness a basis does not exist and cannot be apprehended,”
and so on. This means that just as there is no basis other than suchness, unmistaken suchness, and so on, similarly there is no basis other than awakening. 
 Then to teach that a basis of a conventional bodhisattva does not exist it says,
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, in an illusory person a basis of form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended,”
and so on. This means that just as people who are illusory in nature do not have five aggregates and so on, because they are totally nonexistent, similarly conventional bodhisattvas also do not have a five-aggregate basis.
 Then to teach that the true dharmic nature of a bodhisattva does not have five aggregates and so on it says,
“To illustrate, Subhūti, a basis of the form, feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness of a tathāgata, worthy one, perfect complete buddha does not exist and cannot be apprehended.”
and so on. This means that just as a dharma body tathāgata does not have five aggregates and so on, similarly an ultimate bodhisattva does not have five aggregates and so on either. 
 Then to teach that a basis for a heroic being does not exist in awakening it says,
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the uncompounded element a basis of the compounded element does not exist,”
and so on. This means that just as saṃsāra does not exist in nirvāṇa, similarly a basis for a heroic being does not exist in awakening.
 Then to teach that a basis for awakening does not exist in a heroic being it says
“in the compounded element  a basis of the uncompounded element does not exist,”
and so on. This means that just as nirvāṇa does not exist in saṃsāra, similarly a basis for a heroic being does not exist in awakening.
 Then to teach that a meaning of the wordawakening does not exist it says,
“To illustrate, Subhūti, in the absence of production… the absence of stopping, the absence of occasioning anything, the absence of appearing, the absence of being apprehended, the absence of defilement, and the absence of purification a basis in reality does not exist,”
and so on. This means that just as in the absence of production and so on a basis in reality does not exist, similarly a basis for a bodhisattva also does not exist in reality. 
 Then to teach that the meaning of the word for the true dharmic nature of a bodhisattva does not exist in a falsely imagined bodhisattva it says,
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, in form a basis in reality for the absence of production, the absence of stopping, the absence of occasioning anything, the absence of appearing, the absence of being apprehended, the absence of defilement, and the absence of purification does not exist,”
and so on. This means that just as the meanings of the words for uncompounded phenomena like nonproduction and so on do not exist in the meanings of the words for the five aggregates and so on, similarly the true dharmic nature of a bodhisattva does not exist in a falsely imagined bodhisattva constituted out of the five imaginary aggregates and so on.
 Then to teach that the meaning of the word for the falsely imagined bodhisattva does not exist in an ultimate bodhisattva it says,
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the state of the absolute purity of form a basis for a causal sign does not exist,”
and so on. This means: Just as the bases for the causal signs of compounded phenomena do not exist in the absolute purity of the dharma-constituent of the five aggregates, form and so on, [and of the constituents] and so on. And,
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, just as in the state of the absolute purity of the self and so on a basis for a causal sign does not exist,”
and just as a basis for darkness does not exist in the sun,  a basis for compounded phenomena does not exist in the eon conflagration, and in a tathāgata’s morality, meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation, the bases for their opposing sides do not exist, similarly, “the falsely imagined bodhisattva” constituted out of the five aggregates does not exist in “the ultimate bodhisattva” constituted out of the dharma-constituent.
 Then to teach that an ultimate bodhisattva constituted out of the dharma-constituent does not stand anywhere, with,
“To illustrate further, Subhūti, in the radiance of the sun and moon a basis does not exist,”
and so on, it teaches that a basis does not exist. Thus,
“To illustrate further, the light of the sun, moon, planets, stars, jewels, and lightning”;
the light of the gods living in the desire realm, the light of the Brahmā and Śuddhāvāsa gods living in the form realm; and 
“the light of a tathāgata”
do not stand anywhere because they are all just simply light means that similarly an ultimate bodhisattva without standing anywhere moves through states of existence. 
 Having thus given an elevenfold explanation that the meaning of the word bodhisattva is an absence of a basis, then it says that the reason a basis does not exist is
“because, Subhūti, all those phenomena—that which is awakening, that which is the bodhisattva, that which is the basis in reality of a bodhisattva—are not conjoined, are not disjoined,”
and so on. These are in the sense of “that awakening” on account of “which” those awakening heroic beings making an effort at awakening are exerting themselves; or, alternatively, the “awakening” on account of “which” they get the name “awakening heroic beings”; or “that which is an awakening,” or “that which is the meaning of the name bodhisattva”; or those that are the form, feeling, perception,  volitional factors, and consciousness and so on of a falsely imagined “bodhisattva”; or that which is the true dharmic nature of a bodhisattva, the dharma-constituent. “All those phenomena”—“the awakening” the uncompounded phenomena; “the bodhisattva” the compounded phenomena such as the aggregates, sense fields, constituents, dependent origination and so on; and “the basis in reality” that is the bodhisattva as the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent—“are not conjoined” because in the true dharmic nature state they do not have the nature of defilement, and “are not disjoined” because they are also not marked by purification.
 They 
“cannot by analyzed”
because without thought construction there is no analysis. This teaches that the mark of a grasper does not exist. They
“cannot be pointed out”
because they are inexpressible and hence not suitable to be taught and understood by others through words. Both teach that the mark of a grasper does not exist and the mark of a grasped does not exist. They
“do not obstruct”
because the mark of obstructing like the objects of the senses does not exist. Thus they
“have only one mark—that is, no mark,”
which means that which is separated from all marks is marked by no mark. 
“Should train in nonattachment and in the nonexistence”—
because of an attachment to awakening, or because of grasping at awakening as a real thing, they are called “awakening heroic beings.” So this means that in order to turn back those two conceptualizations they should train in all phenomena marked by nonattachment and marked as unreal things.
“By not constructing any phenomena and not entertaining any ideas about them”—
if they construct them, with conceptualization as a cause, an awareness of existence arises, and if they entertain any ideas about them, with faith as a cause, attachment arises, so put it together as: by “not constructing” them they do not become existent, and by “not entertaining ideas” attachment does not arise. 
“They should know all phenomena in a nondual way” 
means they are free from the sense of duality in subject and object, expression and thing to be expressed, production and cessation, existent thing and nonexistent thing, dharma and not dharma, compounded and uncompounded, ordinary and extraordinary, and so on.
1b. What is the meaning of the term great being?
Having thus taught the meaning of the word bodhisattva, to teach the meaning of the term great being it asks,
“Lord, you say ‘bodhisattva great beings.’ Why do you say ‘bodhisattva great beings’?”
It means why do you say “great being” about a bodhisattva; why do you use the name “great being”? Of the fourfold intention of the Lord, and the elders Śāriputra, Subhūti, and Pūrṇa, first of all it teaches the Lord’s intention that they are called “great heroic beings” because among beings they are the great heroic beings. Just because of that it says
“they will become the foremost of a great mass of beings, a great collection of groups of beings.”
 The elder Śāriputra’s intention is that they are called “great heroic beings” because they realize the fact that all phenomena are nonexistent things, that they do not exist. Having seen that the names of all phenomena are nonexistent, they also demonstrate that Dharma to others to eliminate conceptualizations—views like
“the view of a self”
and so on; the extreme 
“view of annihilation”
and so on; 
“the view of aggregates”
and so on; up to, at the end,
“the view of complete nirvāṇa.”
 The elder Subhūti’s intention is that these bodhisattvas called “great” are called “great beings” because they have greater nonattachment and nonrepugnance. Just because of that he teaches that they are
“unattached even to that thought”
and so on, and hence they stand without attachment to that. 
 The elder Pūrṇa’s intention is that they are “great beings” because they are armed with great armor, and have entered into a great practice and a great result. Just because of that it teaches that they
“are armed with great armor… have set out in a great vehicle, and… have mounted on a great vehicle.”
The Lord’s intention
Among these, first is the Lord’s explanation. 
“Great mass of beings”—
it says “great mass of beings” based on the qualities of those from
“the Gotra level”
up to
“pratyekabuddhas.”
“Many groups of beings”—
it says groups of bodhisattvas because they are foremost, because of their greater intention and greater practice. Their greater intention is their 
“vajra-like”
production of the thought adorned with five qualities; it is (1) conquering, (2) precious, (3) faultless, (4) not split, and (5) accomplishes the aim.
 Among these, conquering is conquering through the power of wisdom with eight qualities. 
 Because it conquers miserliness and so on, it is a thought to
“give away all my personal possessions.”
 Because it conquers greed and hatred and so on, it is
“the same attitude of mind.”
 Because it conquers all wrong views, it is a thought to
 “lead beings to nirvāṇa by means of the three vehicles.”
 Because it does not perceive leading beings to nirvāṇa and has conquered all dharmas, it is the thought,
“I must understand that… all phenomena are not produced and do not stop.”
 Because it has conquered the deficient vehicle, it is
“the unmixed thought of the knowledge of all aspects.”
 Because it has conquered all bad forms of life, it is
“the all-pervasive, thoroughly established realization of dharmas,”
which is to say, the realization of suchness in its all-pervasive sense on the first level.
 Because it has conquered  all thought constructions to do with the cycles of existence, it is the thought,
“I must awaken to finding and producing within myself all dharmas, from the aggregates, up to the perfections, in accord with one principle,”
which is to say it realizes all dharmas—the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, dependent origination, and perfections—in accord with the principle of emptiness. 
 And because it has conquered all thought constructions to do with purification, it is the awakening to the consummation of 
“the dharmas on the side of awakening, the immeasurables,”
and so on, up to, at the end,
“the distinct attributes of a buddha,”
which is to say it is an awakening to completing the meditation on those.
 Having thus taught the eight good qualities of wisdom, to teach that the great power of compassion in that thought is precious, it says,
“I must, even for the sake of one being,”
and so on.
 To teach that that precious thought is faultless, it says it is
“a prodigious thought,”
without the faults of a 
“greedy… hateful… confused… violent… [or] śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha thought.”
“That, Subhūti, is the bodhisattva great beings’ prodigious thought on account of which they become the foremost of all beings, but without falsely projecting anything.”
 About that vajra-like thought not being split, it says
“that their attention connected with the knowledge of all aspects does not falsely project anything”
because the opposing side, the Māras and so on, cannot split it.
 In regard to its accomplishing the aim and being like a precious jewel, it says they 
“should think to be of benefit and bring happiness.”
 Having thus taught that the bodhisattvas have a greater intention, to teach that they have a greater practice in a threefold explanation it says they should stand in
“a delight in Dharma… should stand in emptiness… and should abide in meditative stabilization.”
Take 
“the unbroken unity of all dharmas”
as the dharma body, because all those bright dharmas are without difference.
Śāriputra’s intention
Now it teaches the elder Śāriputra’s intention. 
“Eliminate the view of a self,”
and so on, teaches the selflessness of persons. 
“Eliminate the view of aggregates,” 
and so on, teaches the selflessness of dharmas. 
“Apprehend form, and by way of apprehending it produce a view about it”—
apprehending the form aggregate and so on is the cause that produces conceptualization.
Subhūti’s intention
The elder Subhūti’s confidence and readiness to explain is demonstrated with,
“That thought is no thought and because it is no thought it is unattached even to that.”
The ultimate, true dharmic nature of thought is “no thought” because it is separated from all the marks of falsely imagined thought. Therefore, “the thought” of awakening “is unattached to that,” the falsely imagined thought. 
“Venerable Subhūti, what is the thought that is equal to the unequaled, a thought not shared in common with any śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas?”
He is asking about the mark of the thought of awakening. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, here after the production of the first thought of awakening,”
and so on, teaches the mark of the ultimate thought. The nonconceptual mind from the Pramuditā level on up is called “the thought of awakening.”
“They do not see either the production or stopping of any dharma at all”—
because it realizes suchness in its omnipresent sense and so on, the fundamentally transformed mind is space-like and sees all phenomena as space-like. Regarding this comparison to space, even though production and cessation appear in compounded phenomena, in walls and so on, that stand together with it, space has no production and cessation. It does not increase or decrease even when it is covered by or not separated from clouds and so on. Even though the rocks and trees that are together with it come and go, space itself does not come and go; even though fog, haze, smoke and so on are there and then not there, it does not become defiled  and does not become purified either. It is the same with all phenomena. They are ultimately thoroughly established, with 
“no production, no stopping, no decrease, no increase, no coming, no going, no defilement, and no purification.”
But during the falsely imagined period those phenomena that are like illusions appear as if they have production and so on. The mind that realizes that is called
“the thought equal to the unequaled, a thought not shared in common.”
With 
“Venerable Subhūti, you said,”
and so on, the elder Śāriputra teaches that it is not only to just that that they are unattached, but the mark of nonattachment pervades all phenomena as well. It explains this with,
“Venerable Subhūti, would not form, then, also be unattached?”
and so on.
“That thought… is without outflows and does not belong”—
this also teaches that all dharmas are pervaded by the mark of nonattachment.
“No-form also is unattached to form.”
Construe this as: Just as it said that the thoroughly established thought is “no-thought” because it is separated from the mark of falsely imagined thought, similarly the true dharmic nature of form is called “no-form” because it is separated from the mark of falsely imagined form. That intrinsic nature, the true nature of dharmas, that is “no-form” is “unattached” to falsely imagined form, and the true nature of dharmas that is not the unreal feeling is also unattached to falsely imagined feeling.
1c. How are they armed with great armor?
Pūrṇa’s intention
The elder Pūrṇa’s explanation is that they
“are armed with great armor”
and so on, teaching that from the first thought on, their intention is vast. They
“have set out in a Great Vehicle”
teaches the stage from the devoted course of conduct level up to the seventh level where practice operates together with effort and together with thought construction.  They 
“have mounted on a Great Vehicle”
teaches from the eighth level on up, where it is the ultimate practice.
 There, being armed with armor is explained in two parts: the vast intention to work hard for the welfare of all beings, and the vast practice that fully completes all practices in a single practice.
 Among them, the vast intention is taught from where it says they
“do not practice for awakening for a partial number of beings,”
and ‘I have to establish all beings in those perfections,’ up to,
“Venerable Śāriputra, they are therefore said to be ‘armed with great armor.’ ”
The explanation of the vast practice is from
“furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom give a gift,”
and so on, up to where each of the six perfections is connected with the others so that the buddhas standing in the ten directions also
“cry out cries of delight and proclaim the name.”
“Not… for a partial number of beings”
means “an object has not been carved out,” so the vast intention is explained in terms of these three: an object has not been carved out, a being has not been carved out, and a practice has not been carved out.
 From the vast practice, the practice of the perfection of giving 
“is the perfection of giving armor.”
The basic giving of material things is the perfection of giving. It is called “perfection of giving armor” because it has been 
“made… into something shared in common by all beings”
and dedicated 
“to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening”
and the welfare of all beings. 
 Similarly, the giving of material things is the perfection of giving, and when it is practiced
“with attention not connected with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas…  it is perfection of morality armor”
because, having produced the thought of perfect, complete awakening and taken the vow, giving it up is contrary to morality.
 Similarly, the giving of material things is the perfection of giving. Working hard at that, the 
“forbearance for”
definitive meditation on 
“phenomena,”
the reality of patience when paying attention to a gift, a giver, and a recipient that cannot be apprehended is 
“the perfection of patience armor.”
 Similarly, when giving gifts, the intensification of perseverance at giving dedicated to the welfare of all beings is 
“the perfection of perseverance armor.”
 Similarly, when giving gifts, be it during the period of giving or during the period of dedication, a mind one-pointedly focused on attention to the knowledge of all aspects is 
“the perfection of concentration armor.”
“Have only that as their focus”
means it has only the knowledge of all aspects as its focus. 
 Similarly, when giving gifts, paying attention to not stopping attention to things being like illusions and so on, and attention to the absence of thought constructions—paying attention to not forsaking the conventional dedication to awakening and not forsaking the ultimate practice that cannot be apprehended—is
“perfection of wisdom armor.”
 Similarly, when giving gifts, still wanting to fulfill the six perfections through attention to the practice of not apprehending anything, also not apprehending the causal signs of giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration and wisdom; having set out to make that into something shared in common, not apprehending the causal sign even of that; and dedicating it to perfect, complete awakening but not apprehending the causal sign even of awakening—this attention to not apprehending the causal signs of all dharmas is
“the six perfections armor,”
because it has been aided  by the six ultimate perfections. In order to teach just those six ultimate perfections each has been taught separately. 
 Furthermore, when bodhisattvas guard morality, and, because it will be in accord with that morality, give gifts, and with an intention in accord with that morality make it into something shared in common and dedicate it to awakening, that practice of the perfection of morality is called
“giving armor.”
Similarly, connect “doing the giving and so on with an intention in accord with patience, and because it will be in accord with perseverance, and because it will be in accord with concentration” with them all. Connect “being in accord with eliminating such opposing-side afflictions as miserliness, immorality, animosity” and so on with all the perfections as well.
2. How have they set out in the Great Vehicle?
To pose the second question, it says,
“Venerable Pūrṇa, to what extent have bodhisattva great beings set out in a great vehicle, and what is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle?”
 Having said that, elder Pūrṇa, having taught a tenfold great vehicle and setting out in a great vehicle tenfold, then says
“in that way… [they] have set out in the Great Vehicle.”
 There, having first taught that when they meditate on the four form concentrations, the four immeasurables, the four formless absorptions, and those twelve dharmas and the six perfections it is a great vehicle, and when they
“pay attention to the attributes, tokens, and signs”
of those, make them into something shared in common, and grow them into awakening that they have set out in the Great Vehicle,  it sums up in conclusion with,
“That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle.”
 Then, the second also teaches them, in order to teach that when those same six perfections and those twelve have been made complete it is the Great Vehicle, and that those working hard at those as explained in the Sūtra are those who have set out. Thus it says,
“That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle that is the six perfections, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle.”
Take the “giving” here as the gift of the dharmas, so, again, when meditated on in all their aspects, the dharmas from the applications of mindfulness, up to, at the end, 
“the distinct attributes of a buddha”
are the Great Vehicle. And again, the third is that those working hard at meditating on them in all their aspects have set out in the Great Vehicle, thus it again says,
“That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle.”
 Then the fourth is where it says the two—meditation on the immeasurables and the six perfections—is the Great Vehicle and those working hard at those as explained in the Sūtra are those who have set out.
 Then the fifth is where it says the sixteen emptinesses are the Great Vehicle and those who pay attention to them without apprehending them are those who have set out.
 Then the sixth is where it says unscattered meditative equipoises are the Great Vehicle and those who know them are those who have set out.  This means that when abiding in apprehending scattering and meditative stabilization together with causal signs, not signlessness, abiding without thought construction is always meditative equipoise. 
 Then the seventh is where it says the nondual true nature of dharmas is the Great Vehicle and those who neither know nor not know that are those who have set out. 
 Then the eighth is where it says the sameness of the three time periods is the Great Vehicle, and those not without knowledge of them and with nonapprehending knowledge are those who have set out.
 Then the ninth is where it says the sameness of the three realms is the Great Vehicle, and those not without knowledge of them and with nonapprehending knowledge are those who have set out. 
 And then the tenth is where it says all dharmas are the Great Vehicle and those who do not apprehend a knower of them are those who have set out. Having completed those, it sums up in conclusion with,
“That, Venerable Śāriputra, is the bodhisattva great beings’ Great Vehicle, and in that way bodhisattva great beings have set out in the Great Vehicle.”
3. How do they stand in the Great Vehicle?
Now to pose the third question it says, 
“Venerable Pūrṇa, to what extent does a bodhisattva great being stand in the Great Vehicle?”
 The elder Pūrṇa then gives an exposition of six nonconceptual practices from the eighth level on up. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, here when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom they mount up on the perfection of giving,”
and so on, teaches the first stage of nonconceptual perfection without thought construction. Nonconceptual meditation on emptiness is the second, nonconceptual meditation on all bright dharmas  the third, all dharmas that cannot be apprehended the fourth, the stage of control the fifth, and complete awakening the sixth.
 There, the first is they
“stand in the perfection of giving.”
This means they stand up on a place—a maturation without conceptualization—that is a perfection beyond the level of conceptual practice. At the eighth level they have arrived at effortless perfections that are maturation results that have come about from having earlier completed, with conceptualization and with effort, the accumulation of merits. They have come about in the form of a result so they are nonconceptual. Bodhisattvas accomplish the welfare of beings through those, through the power of skillful means, and through the power of prayer that is a vow.
 Second, it says they
 “meditate on… emptiness… because of the investigation of the meditation.”
Take “disintegration of the meditation” here as making it empty. What it means is by meditating on disintegration they meditate without apprehending anything. They “meditate” on this, on just this turning it into a nonexistent thing. 
 The rest are easy to understand.
The elder Pūrṇa having thus demonstrated his confidence and readiness to speak, the elder Subhūti, wanting to understand the Lord’s intention, inquires,
“Lord, to what extent are bodhisattva great beings armed with great armor?”
 Having been asked that, the Lord teaches the ninefold great armor. After that, then the elder Subhūti demonstrates his two confidences and readinesses to speak, and there is an explanation in eleven sections of the text. 
 From among those armed with all the armor, the section of the text on extinguishing bad forms of life with maturation-based magical power, together with the section on them being conjured up, is the first; the six sections on the six perfections  are the six that are like things that have been conjured up; conjuring up establishing beings in the ten directions in the six perfections is the eighth; and the vast intention is the ninth.
 Then the elder Subhūti, to demonstrate that he has generated a confidence and readiness to speak about that on account of an illusion-like cause, says,
“The way I understand what you, Lord, have said…”
As for,
“Oh! Those bodhisattva great beings should be understood to be armed with no armor,”
this means that because all the armor that has been explained before is falsely imagined, bodhisattva great beings are armed with an armor that has the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, suchness, for its intrinsic nature. Therefore, he says
“because all dharmas, given the illusory nature of dharmas, are empty of their own mark.”
 To establish that they are illusory phenomena, it says
“form is empty of form”
and so on. This connects thoroughly established form being empty of falsely imagined form, and thoroughly established feeling being empty of falsely imagined feeling, with “therefore ultimate armor is empty of falsely imagined armor.” Therefore at the end it says
“great armor is empty of great armor. I understand that bodhisattva great beings are armed with no armor, Lord, through this one of many explanations.”
 What is the intention where it says,
“Subhūti, the knowledge of all aspects is not made, is not unmade, and does not occasion anything”?
In this world protective equipment refers to three things: Thinking, “What needs to be done?” you wear protective clothing. To illustrate, you think, “I will build a town” or “I will build a temple.” Thinking, “What should I destroy?” you put on armor. For example, you think, “I will destroy the town” or “I will destroy the temple.” Thinking, “To what  should I give an occasion?” you put on protective equipment. To illustrate, you think, “I will enjoy the town” or “I will clean the town.” It is similar with the knowledge of all aspects as well. Someone may have become armed with great armor for the purpose of the knowledge of all aspects that is made, or destroyed, or given an occasion like that. But the knowledge of all aspects is not made, is not unmade, and does not occasion anything, so it is not correct to become armed with great armor for that purpose. The intention, therefore, is that they are correct to think they are 
“armed with no armor.”
 Just because of that it says,
“Subhūti, given that you cannot apprehend a maker, the knowledge of all aspects is not made, not unmade, and does not occasion anything … Because they absolutely do not exist and absolutely cannot be apprehended.”
Also, it says that about
“suchness,”
because when it is grasped in a falsely imagined form, as “the suchness of form, the suchness of feeling” and so on, in that form it does not exist. 
 Then the elder Subhūti, in order to teach what he is thinking, says,
“Lord, the way I understand what you have said, Lord,”
and so on. 
 What is intended where it says
“form is not bound and is not freed”?
Some think that because the five aggregates without outflows are bound with fetters, and so on, they are bound by afflictions and karma, going in cycles from one form of life to another again and again, and later the ones without outflows are freed, at which point they are destroyed. But because of what was intended by “not made” and “not unmade” it says they are
“not bound and are not freed”
and so on. This means both being bound and being freed happen when something exists. Thus, form and so on are totally nonexistent things so how could being bound and being freed happen to them,  given that they do not exist? They are not established. Being bound and being freed are taught based on the falsely imagined, but not ultimately. Therefore, it says,
“Venerable Pūrṇa, because form does not exist, form is not bound and is not freed,”
and so on. With they are
“dream-like”
and so on, it teaches that thoroughly established form is also not bound and is not freed. 
“Because [they are] isolated, calm, empty”
means they abide, like space, so it is not logical that they are bound and freed.
 The rest is easy to understand.
6. How is it a great vehicle?
 Having made the great armor stable and complete, the elder Subhūti, taking as his point of departure the statement “have set out in a great vehicle,” has posed five questions:
“Lord, what is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings?” 
and so on. 
There the Lord explains “Great Vehicle” under twenty-one subdivisions. These are:
Great Vehicle of the perfections,Great Vehicle of all the emptinesses,Great Vehicle of all the meditative stabilizations,Great Vehicle of the applications of mindfulness, Great Vehicle of the right efforts,Great Vehicle of the legs of miraculous power, Great Vehicle of the faculties,Great Vehicle of the powers,Great Vehicle of the limbs of awakening, Great Vehicle of the path, Great Vehicle of the liberations, Great Vehicle of the knowledges, Great Vehicle of the three faculties, Great Vehicle of the three meditative stabilizations, Great Vehicle of the mindfulnesses, Great Vehicle of the five absorptions, Great Vehicle of the ten powers, Great Vehicle of the four fearlessnesses, Great Vehicle of the four detailed and thorough knowledges, Great Vehicle of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, andGreat Vehicle of the dhāraṇī gateways. 
2. Great Vehicle of all the emptinesses
Among these, in the second section of the text, Great Vehicle of all the emptinesses, it says
“eyes are empty of eyes because they are neither unmoved nor destroyed.”
Falsely imagined eyes are empty of falsely imagined eyes. “Empty” has the sense of nonexistent so it means a real basis of eyes does not exist in the eyes.
 This means were they to be existent you can suppose they would remain there permanently unmoved, or they would be impermanent and destroyed. Thus they do not remain there unmoved and they are not destroyed, so they do not exist because “they are neither unmoved nor destroyed.” 
“Because that is their basic nature”—
the absence of a real basis of eyes in the eyes is their basic nature, which is to say, their intrinsic nature.
 The nonexistence of inner and outer dharmas, each separately, are two emptinesses. 
 The emptiness of inner dharmas that grasp outer dharmas, and of outer dharmas that have become objects of inner dharmas, that is, of subjects and objects is the 
“emptiness of inner and outer,”
the third emptiness. 
 That which has become 
“the emptiness of that emptiness that is the emptiness of all dharmas is the emptiness of emptiness.”
It is called an “emptiness of emptiness” because it is that—empty—and it is that—emptiness—as well. So, it is called an “emptiness of emptiness.” Of what is it empty? It is saying it is empty of the emptiness that is the emptiness of all dharmas. What is it teaching? It means there is no other second emptiness in emptiness; it is “empty” just from its nature. 
“The eastern direction is empty of the eastern direction”;
 it is called a
“great emptiness,”
in the sense that “it pervades all directions” because the emptiness of things that are huge is greater.
“Nirvāṇa is also empty of nirvāṇa because it is neither unmoved nor destroyed.”
It is empty of the basic nature of ultimate nirvāṇa. But is nirvāṇa not taken to be “unmoved”?  The system of some thinkers in the Śrāvaka Vehicle is like that, but in “ultimate reality” there is no dharma called “nirvāṇa.”
“The compounded”
is the three realms.
It says this because all compounded things are included in the three realms. 
“What has no production, no stopping, no destruction, no lasting, and no changing into something else”—
the arising of dharmas is “production,” cutting the stream is “stopping,” moment by moment perishing is “destruction,” not cutting the stream of a continuum is “lasting,” and the earlier and later distinction in a continuum is “changing into something else.” The dharmas in which these are absent are the 
“uncompounded,”
which is to say space, suchness, and the two cessations. Those phenomena that are uncompounded do not exist as real bases, hence 
“the emptiness of the uncompounded.”
 Since it is enough just to teach “it is the extreme of annihilation and it is the extreme of permanence,” the extremes of an existent thing and a nonexistent thing, dharma and nondharma, existence and nonexistence, and so on are included in just that. 
 As for
“that of which a beginning and an end are not found has no middle,”
and so on—in
“no beginning and end,”
take “a beginning” as the past and take “an end” as the future; alternatively, take “a beginning” as former and “an end” as later. Because both extremes do not exist, a “middle” does not exist either. Hence the emptiness of no beginning, no end, and no middle is 
“the emptiness of no beginning and no end.”
Alternatively, just no beginning, no end, and no middle are empty of a beginning, end, and middle, hence “the emptiness of no beginning and no end.”
“The emptiness of nonrepudiation”—
this means emptiness is not posited like a pitcher becoming empty when you tip out and get rid of the water it had before— that you later reject and throw away some ultimately real material that was there before. The nonexistence of dharmas in their intrinsic nature is “emptiness.” There,
“nonrepudiation is empty of nonrepudiation”
means an attribute, nonrepudiation, does not exist at all. 
“The emptiness of a basic nature”—
that true nature of dharmas, which is emptiness,
“the basic nature of… the compounded or uncompounded,”
is not fabricated by anyone,
“is not made by śrāvakas… pratyekabuddhas… or tathāgatas,”
hence it is called “basic nature.” That basic nature of all attributes is also empty of a basic nature, in the sense that when that which possesses an attribute exists its basic nature is established; and if just such a possessor of an attribute does not exist, of what would it be suitable to say it is its basic nature? Therefore, it says
“a basic nature is empty of a basic nature.”
“All dharmas are empty of all dharmas”
means ultimately all dharmas do not have the intrinsic nature of all dharmas. 
“The emptiness of its own mark”—
this means that if dharmas are nonexistent, of what would those be the specific marks? Therefore, because dharmas are simply just falsely imagined, these marks also are falsely imagined and hence do not exist.
“The emptiness of not apprehending”—
those 
“dharmas”
included in the three times that do not exist in the three times 
“cannot be apprehended.”
That 
“not apprehending is empty of not apprehending”
in the sense that some other attribute—“not apprehending”—does not exist anywhere at all.
“The emptiness of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature”—
this has two explanations. There the first explanation is,
“Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of a phenomenon that has arisen from a union does not exist.”
What is this teaching? Here, when all phenomena are produced, they are not produced  solely through their own power; they are produced through the power of causes and conditions. To illustrate, when a seed produces a seedling, it does not produce it solely through its own force; it is produced through the force of a union with soil, water, and so on. Similarly, all phenomena are produced from a complex of causes and conditions. They are not produced solely thought their own force, so they are just dependent originations. Even though those phenomena produced in dependence on other phenomena have the nature of being seeable, an experience, and so on, still, insofar as they are produced just from the complex of causes and conditions, it is said they have “arisen from a union.” And how can you say of something that has arisen from a union that it is its “intrinsic nature”? Therefore, all phenomena arise because of some other existent thing, an existence of its own does not exist, so, because their intrinsic nature does not exist, therefore it says “nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.” And so it says,
“Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of a phenomenon that has arisen from a union does not exist, because phenomena have originated dependently.”
Just this is the intrinsic nature of all phenomena that are nonexistent things, “the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.”
 In regard to the other explanation of “nonexistence of an intrinsic nature,” it says 
“an existent thing is empty of an existent thing, a nonexistent thing is empty of a nonexistent thing”—
the existent thing and an intrinsic nature are an existent thing and an intrinsic nature; and the nonexistent thing and an intrinsic nature are a nonexistent thing and an intrinsic nature. In this construction, from the words nonexistent thing it is realized that an existent thing does not exist whereby an existent thing, as well as a nonexistent thing, are grasped; and from the words nonintrinsic nature it is realized that it is not an intrinsic nature whereby an intrinsic nature, as well as a nature from something else, are grasped. Those four emptinesses are called “the emptiness of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.” 
“An existent thing”
arises from those conditions, so associate the words “existent thing” with compounded phenomena. Therefore, it says 
“an existent thing is empty of an existent thing.”
Associate the words 
“nonexistent thing” 
with uncompounded phenomena. Therefore, it says 
“a nonexistent thing is empty of a nonexistent thing.”
There it means an existent phenomenon is separated from an essential nature of an existent thing, and a nonexistent phenomenon is separated from an essential nature of a nonexistent thing. 
“Intrinsic nature”
is knowledge and seeing because the thoroughly established state left over when the imaginary state of phenomena is eliminated is the intrinsic nature of knowledge and seeing. That is why it is so called. There, the emptiness of knowledge 
“has not been made by knowledge,”
and the emptiness of seeing 
“has not been made by seeing,”
so, the emptiness of those two intrinsic natures is the 
“basic nature… called the emptiness of an intrinsic nature.”
“Whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise”—
that 
“suchness,”
that 
“true nature of dharmas”
that marks what 
“remains,”
is not made by something else—a “tathāgata” and so on that is other, so 
“the emptiness of a nature from something else”
is said of what does not have a maker that is other. 
3. Great Vehicle of all the meditative stabilizations
Then, in order to set the scene for the Great Vehicle of all the meditative stabilizations, it says
“the meditative stabilization śūraṅgama”
and so on. The one that like a hero does the work of the meditative stabilizations, causes an experience of the range of all meditative stabilizations, and pervades them totally is called the śūraṅgama. 
Nonconceptual, extraordinary states of mind without outflows of buddhas and bodhisattvas are called meditative stabilization because they privilege nondistraction and activity that is not carried out with thought construction. Those meditative stabilizations are not concentrations, because concentrations are included in the activity of those who have form. And even though they are one in their nature as states of mind, through the force of earlier endeavors, insofar as they are catalysts for different distinct activities  they are set forth with different names governed by the work they do. 
 Furthermore, they are not within the range of others’ thought, because they are self-reflexive analytic knowledges. You should take them as they are said to be in the Sūtra, and not subject them to logical analysis. 
4. Great Vehicle of the applications of mindfulness
“Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the four applications of mindfulness.”
Here it is called a foundation of mindfulness because mindfulness is placed close by, hence the foundation is the four—
“body… feeling… mind… and dharmas”—
and they are referred to with the locution applications of mindfulness.
 It is mindfulness, and it is an application, so, since it is said to be an application of mindfulness, it is the four mindfulnesses for not forgetting and for guarding the objects of the four dharmas that are its objects. Because its objective supports are four it is called the four applications of mindfulness.
 Here the earlier teaching is about all four applications of mindfulness in the Great Vehicle system, and the latter is a teaching about the application of mindfulness to the body alone, in six parts in accord with the śrāvaka system. 
“Dwell while viewing in a body the inner body”—
the body is reckoned to be the inner being. When they are viewing it, they are said to be “viewing in a body the inner body.” When they are viewing the body of form that is outer, not reckoned to be the being, they are said to be 
“viewing in a body the outer body.”
When they are viewing somebody else’s body, reckoned to be an outer being, they are said to be 
“viewing in a body the inner and outer body.”
 When, having taken the inner form reckoned to be the being as the objective support, feelings, mind, and dharmas arise, take them to be 
“inner feelings, inner mind, and inner dharmas.”
When they arise from having taken the outer form not reckoned to be a being as the objective support, they are called
“outer feelings, outer mind, and outer dharmas.”
When  they arise from having taken the form of somebody else counted as a being as the objective support, they are called
“inner and outer feelings, inner and outer mind, and inner and outer dharmas.”
 Alternatively, “while viewing in a body the inner body” is said to be when they take the six sense fields as their objective support; “while viewing in a body the outer body” is said to be when they take outer form not included in and not informed by the faculties as their objective support; and “viewing in a body the inner and outer body” is said to be when they take form not included in the six sense fields, but taken as inner, as their objective support. Connect the “feeling, mind, and dharmas” that have arisen from having taken those three forms as their objective support threefold as well. 
 As another alternative, when taking the materiality of the inner elements included in one’s own body as the objective support it is called inner; when taking the outer elements of somebody else as the objective support it is called outer; and having made that materiality of the elements into the cause, when taking the elemental faculties and their objects as the objective support it is called inner and outer. Again, understand the “feeling, mind, and dharmas” that have arisen from having taken those three forms as their objective support threefold as well. 
 As another alternative, when they are viewing in a body an inner body that has consciousness they are said to be “viewing the inner body, feeling, mind, and dharmas”; when they are viewing the black and blue and so on, which has no consciousness, they are said to be “viewing outer body, feeling, mind, and dharmas”; and when they are viewing what is naturally happening to the form of a body that has no consciousness and is black and blue and so on, which had consciousness in the past, and the same thing naturally happening to this body that has consciousness, and which will also in the future have no consciousness, as equal, they are said to be “viewing inner and outer body, feeling, mind, and dharmas.” 
 “Viewing in a body the inner body” means they “dwell while viewing,” reflecting on an inner body labeledbody, that is they “dwell” dwelling by way of not apprehending anything—by way of not seeing an actual person there, or actual dharmas there. 
 To explicate dwelling by way of not apprehending anything, it says
“without indulging in speculations to do with the body.”
It means these “speculations” with the perception of it as “the body”: that it is “the body”; or that it is permanent, impermanent, pleasure, suffering, with a self, selfless, calm, not calm, empty, or not empty; or that it has a sign, is signless, is wished for, is wishless and so on. They are “without indulging” those. 
“By way of not apprehending anything”
means viewing based on paying attention to not apprehending anything and not speculating that it is this or that. 
“Enthusiastic, introspective, mindful, having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression”—
they are “enthusiastic” because they apply themselves perfectly by practicing continually and practicing respectfully; “introspective” because they pay attention perfectly, viewing with wisdom and introspection; and “mindful” with the mindfulness that is not forgetting, that guards, and that prevents distraction. 
 Then, to teach the benefits of those—of perseverance, wisdom, and mindfulness—it says “having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression.” “Ordinary dharmas” mean ‘worldly dharmas’: the four of attaining, fame, pleasure, and praise, which give rise to mental attachment in an ordinary person;  and the four of not attaining, infamy, blame, and pain, which give rise to depression. To teach that such enthusiasm for meditation without apprehending anything is not stained by any of the worldly dharmas, it says “having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression.”
 Alternatively, to teach that they have stopped attachment and anger toward beings and compounded things based on not apprehending persons or dharmas, it says “having cleared away ordinary covetousness and depression.”
 As another alternative, among all the obstructions, attachment that causes them to act on a desire for sense gratification, along with malice, are the main ones. To teach that they have stopped them is to teach that they have stopped all the obstructions.
 Similarly,
“viewing in feelings inner feelings”—
feelings are subdivided into the three feelings that come about based on happiness, suffering, and indifference, which are further subdivided into six based on physical and mental feelings, together with nonspiritual and spiritual ones, and those “based on greed and based on transcendence.” Having undertaken an analysis of them based on the one who feels being the self or the dharmas, having so viewed, they “dwell” dwelling by way of not apprehending anything. 
 Similarly, they “dwell while viewing” by way of not apprehending a self or dharmas, based on the division of mind into “a greedy state of mind and a mind free from greed, a mind with hate and free from hate, a mind with delusion and free from delusion, a mind collected and distracted,” and so on.
 “In dharmas.” Construe this as follows: In the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, obstructions, branches of awakening, noble truths and so on that are the dharmas.  They “dwell” based on them. They meditate on entering into becoming absorbed in them, “not apprehending” any falsely imagined dharma.
 Having thus taught the four applications of mindfulness in the bodhisattva vehicle system, wanting to teach in six parts just the application of mindfulness to the body by way of the teaching in the śrāvaka system, it says they
“dwell, while viewing in a body the inner body, aware, when practicing, ‘I am practicing,’ ”
and so on. It teaches from six points of view: from the viewpoint of the way they carry themselves, from the viewpoint of being clearly conscious, from the viewpoint of breathing in and breathing out, from the viewpoint of the presentation of the constituents, from the viewpoint of the thirty-two aspects, and from the viewpoint of the unpleasantnesses.
 There, first, teaching from the viewpoint of the way they carry themselves, it says
“practicing… standing… sitting… and lying down.”
It teaches these ways they carry themselves in three parts: big, middling, and small. 
 The four ways they carry themselves when going on a long path are termed big. The first section of the text is an explanation based on that.
The four ways they carry themselves when practicing during the period of entering a settlement to beg or when seeking to go from one temple to another temple are middling, and governed by that,
“going out or coming back, clearly conscious of what they are doing”
teaches the second.
The four ways they carry themselves when going to physically relieve themselves—when going to a place to urinate or defecate and so on—are small. Based on that,
“gone, stood, sat down, slept”
teaches those.
“When they have looked around or peered, they are clearly conscious of what they are doing,”
and so on, is just small. 
 The carrying out of all activities is understood analytically in five ways: “I am doing this and that”; “I have to do this and I must not do that”; “this is the right time and that is the wrong time”; “I should do it like this  and I should not do it like that”; and, “it should be done for that purpose.”
“Aware, when practicing, ‘I am practicing,’ ”
and so on, is a further explanation of that. And then, in the section of the passage on the small way they carry themselves, 
“going out”
is going over there, and
“coming back”
is returning. They
“have looked around,”
viewing form without thinking about it, without having made a prior decision to do so. Alternatively, “looking around” is looking in front;
“peered”
is looking in another direction. 
“They have pulled in,”
retracted, and 
“stretched out,”
extended, their shoulders, arms, legs, limbs, and extremities in these or those activities. Their large robe is the
“under robe,”
and the robes other than that are the
“outer robe.”
The receptacle for alms is
“a begging bowl.”
They 
“have eaten”
cooked rice and so on;
“drunk”
beverages and so on; have
“chewed”
vegetables and so on; and
“savored”
milk, yogurt, and molasses and so on. They are
“overcome by drowsiness”
at the wrong time, when traveling on a path and so on or when oppressed by the heat and so on. It is
“warded off”
by gazing off into the directions and so on, splashing water and so on, and wiping the face and so on. They have
“gone”
treading and so on;
“stood”
attending on a guru and so on;
“sat down”
in a cross-legged posture and so on; 
“slept”
by sleeping at the right time in the way a lion sleeps;
“awoken”
by not falling asleep during a period of five watches;
“spoken”
perfect discourses explaining the doctrine;
“remained silent,”
thinking about and pondering, and so on, the meaning of the doctrines heard and taken up in the mind; and are
“withdrawn for meditation”
when working hard at insight and calm abiding.
 In regard to the third viewpoint of breathing in and breathing out, it says they
“are mindful when breathing in, aware of the fact ‘I am breathing in’; are mindful when breathing out, aware of the fact ‘I am breathing out.’
This means  they make mindfulness and introspection primary and concentrate well on ‘I am breathing in.’ 
“When breathing in long, [they] are aware of the fact ‘I am breathing in long.’ ”
When beginners are persevering at mindfulness and introspection their body and mind become pliant and the in and out breaths gradually become more and more subtle. It becomes more and more difficult to pay attention. At that point practitioners lengthen their breath and make themselves pay attention. 
 Some say to take a rest you should meditate by sometimes shortening it and sometimes lengthening it. 
 Others say “long” is the ordinary breathing in and out, and “short” is breathing in and out from time to time. In
“a skillful potter or potter’s apprentice”
the “skillful potter” is the one who is well trained and the “potter’s apprentice” the trainee. It mentions them both to teach that the complete yogic practitioner and the beginner are similar. 
 From the viewpoint of constituents and from the viewpoint of the body are easy to understand.
 There are nine sections of the text from the viewpoint of unpleasantness: a body
“dead for one day… bloated”;
“dead for two days… black and blue”;
“dead for three days, or dead for four days… putrid”;
“or dead for five days… cleaned out by worms,”
which is to say, the worms have gotten into it. In all the past this
“has such a quality”;
in the future as well it
“is of such a nature”;
and in the present it also
“does not go beyond having that as its natural state.”
 The two—the
“being eaten”
section and the
“chewed up”
section—are the “savaged” unpleasantness divided in terms of the present and past. The two—the
“daubed with flesh and blood, and hardly connected by sinews”
section, and the section when all the three are no longer there—are the “bloodied”  unpleasantness. The two—
“the bones no longer held in the frame of a skeleton, detached from each other, scattered about like conch shells”
section, and the
“in one the bones of the feet, in another the bones of the lower leg” 
section—are the “torn asunder” unpleasantness. The section on being 
“scattered”
in one and in all the directions is just a subdivision of that. The next two sections are the “bare-bones” unpleasantness—where they are not colored and have not crumbled, and where they are colored and have crumbled, are just divisions of that. 
 Thus, there the unpleasantness is eightfold: bloated, black and blue, putrid, cleaned out by worms, savaged, bloodied, torn asunder, and bare-bones. As for the one “cleaned out by worms,” the one that is “burnt” is just that too. 
 There, first of all is paying attention without apprehending anything. There are five of viewing a body that has consciousness, and eight unpleasantnesses where there is no consciousness, and an explanation of mindfulness of the body in thirteen parts, so the passage has fifteen sections.
5. Great Vehicle of the right abandonments 
The second is
“the four right abandonments.”
They are “right efforts,” that is to say, perseverance, because they put the mind to work in the right way. Furthermore, because that perseverance is of four types on account of specific practices, it says “four.” They
“generate the desire…, making an effort at it, making a vigorous attempt, tightening up the mind and perfectly settling it down.”
Perseverance is of four types: armor-perseverance, practice-perseverance, perseverance by not getting depressed, and perseverance through skillful means, so it says “four.” The first makes them buckle on armor, thinking “I will do it like this.” About this, it says  “generate the desire.” Then they exert themselves in practice in line with the armor they have buckled on. About this, it says “making an effort at it.” Then, even if it becomes very difficult, without getting depressed they try even harder. About this, it says “making a vigorous attempt.” Then they forsake the practice without skillful means and establish themselves in perfect skillful means. The two—“tightening up the mind” and “perfectly settling it down”—teach this. When the mind is overly relaxed, they tighten it by paying attention to tightening up, hence it says “tightening up the mind”; and when the mind becomes agitated they perfectly settle it down by paying attention to becoming collected, hence it says “perfectly settling it down.” 
6. Great Vehicle of the legs of miraculous power
The third is
“the four legs of miraculous power.”
They are “legs of miraculous power” because they serve as the underpinning and foundation of miraculous powers termed extraordinary dharmas. They are four:
“yearning… perseverance, concentrated mind, and examination.”
Thus, when certain persons generate a strong desire to cultivate the wholesome dharmas and they have practiced solely on account of the power of the “yearning” to do that, they ponder well, think about and pay attention to nothing else, and their mind becomes single-pointed. That meditative stabilization that is produced, governed by their desire to do it, is called 
“yearning… meditative stabilization.”
 When certain persons practice with the perseverance of the four right efforts, when they have practiced striving perfectly to eliminate the unwholesome and produce the wholesome, their minds become single-pointed. That meditative stabilization that is produced, governed by their perseverance at it, is called 
“perseverance… meditative stabilization.”
 When certain persons have engaged in training their minds, they cause them to settle down with calm abiding, tightening, and equanimity as the cause, and, through the power of training their minds, their minds abide in single-pointedness. That meditative stabilization that is produced, governed  by the concentrated mind, is called 
“concentrated mind… meditative stabilization.”
 When certain persons practice perfectly and stop what is improper and correctly pay attention, when they are not ensnared and become habituated to things that counteract becoming ensnared so that they do not do the bad unwholesome things they were used to doing, they reflect like this: “Am I not doing the bad things I am used to doing?” Even while they are reflecting like that they also think: “I must fully examine whether those bad unwholesome things exist and am I not doing what I am used to doing, or whether they do not exist and I am not doing what I am used to doing.” They direct their attention to such an examination and meditate perfectly. When they exert themselves based on paying attention to the examination of that, the meditative stabilization that arises is called 
“endowed with an examination… meditative stabilization.”
 After the four meditative stabilizations have come about and the snares are distant, they make a further vigorous attempt to eliminate the residual impressions with the above four right efforts. When they make the vigorous attempt, the eight dharmas of the 
“volitional effort to eliminate”
arise. These are the yearning intention to generate the ordinary and extraordinary absorptions, the resolve to overcome all unwholesome dharmas, the faith in qualities attained at higher stages, the pliancy when that has gone before, the mindfulness and introspection factors in that, the introspection on the insight side, the mind that is actively concerned with that, and the relaxation when there is no degeneration of the mind. This means they 
“develop”
the meditative stabilization that is a 
“limb of”
extraordinary
“miraculous power endowed with”
the aforementioned “yearning… meditative stabilization” and the eight dharmas of the “volitional effort to eliminate”—  yearning, perseverance, faith, pliancy, mindfulness, introspection, intention, and equanimity. 
“Based on isolation”—
“isolation” is from defilements; 
“detachment” 
is from suffering existence; 
“cessation”
is of suffering; and 
“renunciation”
is of all the aggregates. 
 Alternatively, “based on isolation” is because of comprehending the truth of suffering; 
“based on detachment”
is because of eliminating the truth of origination;
“based on cessation” 
is because of making the truth of cessation directly known; and
“transformed by renunciation”
is because of meditation on the truth of the path. 
 Alternatively, it is on account of the aggregate of morality that it is “based on isolation,” on account of the aggregate of meditative stabilization “based on detachment,” on account of the aggregate of wisdom “based on cessation,” and on account of the aggregate of liberation “transformed by renunciation.” 
7. Great Vehicle of the faculties
As for the fourth, when the practitioners of the preparation for reality governed by all four such conditions see the sign that a special dharma is going to emerge, the certainty that the special dharma will emerge arises, and at that time a confidence about what the Teacher and the śrāvakas have attained arises. When they have such confidence, it is called the 
“faith faculty,”
because it is a faculty in charge of the emergence of the transcendental extraordinary dharma at the higher stage. On account of the power of the faith a surpassing perseverance arises. It too is similarly called the 
“perseverance faculty,”
because it is a faculty in charge of the emergence of the transcendental extraordinary dharma. Connect this in the same way with the 
“mindfulness faculty,”
and so on, as well. 
8. Great Vehicle of the powers
As for the fifth, when their faith itself gets stronger and no one at all, be it the gods, Māra, or Brahmā, can withstand it, whatever their qualities, and they are not trapped in the snares of the defilements, it is called the
“faith power.”
Just because it is not overwhelmed for the same reasons just explained,
“perseverance” 
and so on become hard to withstand. The practitioners with those powers are powerful, so having overcome all the powers of Māra they are really prepared. Therefore, they are called powers.
 When those five faith faculties and so on have been developed they become the wholesome roots that are aids to knowledge that penetrates true reality: the warmed, the peaked, the forbearance, and the highest ordinary dharma. During the period of the warmed and peaked they are called faculties; during the forbearance and highest ordinary dharma periods they are called powers.
9. Great Vehicle of the limbs of awakening
There, immediately after “the highest ordinary dharma,” when all five have become extremely strong they become branches of the path of seeing, the correct realization of reality. Thus 
“the seven”
dharmas that are
“limbs of awakening”
arise. The three,
“examination of dharmas, perseverance, and joy,”
are the insight factors;
“pliability, meditative stabilization, and equanimity”
are the calm abiding factors; and 
“mindfulness”
is on both sides. 
10. Great Vehicle of the path
There they see that by attaining those [seven limbs], of their afflictions, the ones eliminated by seeing have been eliminated but the ones eliminated by meditation have not been eliminated. So, to eliminate them they meditate on the noble path that is eightfold, and in the three aggregates. There,
“right view, right idea,and right effort”
are the aggregate of wisdom;
“right speech, right conduct, and right livelihood”
of morality; and the two,
“right mindfulness and right meditative stabilization,”
of meditative stabilization. 
 Because that path systematized as eightfold, furthermore, has eliminated all the defilements of noble trainees, and is the path that witnesses freedom directly, it is called
“the eightfold noble path.” 
 Those are teaching the Great Vehicle of the dharmas on the side of awakening. 
11. Great Vehicle of the liberations
“Furthermore, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this: the three meditative stabilizations that are the three gateways to liberation. What are the three? They are the emptiness meditative stabilization, the signless meditative stabilization, and the wishless meditative stabilization.”
Among them, the single-pointed mind that sees, as an image of the empty, the inexpressible marked as the thoroughly established phenomenon, which is separated from the marks of the objective range of foolish beings marked as falsely imagined, is the emptiness meditative stabilization. 
That attention, in the form of a single-pointed mind, to calmness in the image of a spacelike signlessness, which is a separation from the representation of the true reality that is a thoroughly established functioning thing, an image of a sign that causes all conceptual thought construction, is the signlessness meditative stabilization.
 Also, having grasped true reality—the functioning thing thoroughly established on account of an other-powered phenomenon—and having thought about such an extremely purified functioning thing, that “the affliction of it with the afflictive emotions that arise from a representation of thought construction on account of an other-powered phenomenon would be disgrace”; and having then perceived it as discordant and thought, “From now on may I not wish for and remain in those three realms”—such an attention, in the form of a single-pointed mind, is the wishlessness meditative stabilization.
Seeing that the falsely imagined are without marks is “the emptiness meditative stabilization”; seeing thoroughly established phenomena as having the mark of calmness is “the signless meditative stabilization”; and seeing other-powered phenomena as discordant is “the wishless meditative stabilization.” There, because of the absolute nonexistence of what is marked as falsely imagined, it says
“that which is the stability of mind when it understands analytically that all dharmas are empty of their own marks is the emptiness gateway to liberation.  It is called the emptiness meditative stabilization.”
Because it is the mark of a thoroughly established phenomenon, all dharmas are marked by signlessness, so it says
“that which is the stability of mind when it understands analytically that all dharmas are without a causal sign is the signlessness gateway to liberation. It is called the signlessness meditative stabilization.”
Because it is pure in its true dharmic nature and, because it is caused by afflictions and so on plucked out of thin air, it is not something that exists, that which is the occasioning of anything marked as meritorious, unmeritorious, or immovable does not ultimately exist, so, since all dharmas do not occasion anything, it says
“that which is the stability of mind when it understands analytically that all dharmas do not occasion anything is the wishlessness gateway to liberation. It is called the wishlessness meditative stabilization.”
12. Great Vehicle of the knowledges
In regard to the Great Vehicle of the knowledges, all 
“eleven knowledges”
are the Great Vehicle. 
 Among these, “This is suffering. This is the origin of suffering. This is the cessation of suffering. This is suffering not produced in the future,”
“is knowledge of suffering.”
Even though it is in four parts, here, having taken up the last, knowledge of the fact that suffering will not arise in the future—that its continuum is cut—it
“is called knowledge of suffering.” 
Therefore, it says it is 
“knowledge that suffering is not produced.”
“Knowledge of the abandonment of origination”
means knowledge that all the primary afflictions and the secondary afflictions and the karma that constitute the origin have been eliminated. 
“The knowledge of the cessation of suffering”
is knowledge that the five appropriating aggregates are extinguished. 
“The knowledge of the eightfold noble path”
is knowledge of the cause of the cessation of suffering, that this path and this realization block suffering.
“The knowledge that greed,  hatred, and confusion have been extinguished”
is on the Kṛtāvin level. This knowledge directly perceives it.
“The knowledge that a form of life in suffering existence is not produced”
is a consciousness that birth in a form of life in suffering existence does not exist, which is to say the 
“knowledge of nonproduction”
is the knowledge of subsequent purity.
“Knowledge of the dharma”
is the direct realization of freedom that apprehends that nonproduction or emptiness.
 Impermanence and so on are inferred, so 
“subsequent realization knowledge”
is the knowledge that apprehends those. 
 It is just as an individual that you apprehend the falsely imagined, so
“conventional knowledge”
is knowledge of someone else’s thoughts. 
“Knowledge of mastery”—
“mastery” is making yourself thoroughly familiar with something, the same as “meditation.” Mastery is also the same as “totally vanquishing” bad, unwholesome dharmas. There, in the earlier idea, knowledge that accomplishes the final result is mastery. In the second idea, cognition that vanquishes and extinguishes all that is bad is knowledge of mastery. Hence, it says
“knowledge of the path and knowledge of extinction.”
There, the earlier one teaches in brief that the knowledge of mastery explained below is just that, so it is not being explained again.
There, 
“what is knowledge in accord with sound? It is a tathāgata’s knowledge of all sounds.”
A sound is an expression. Name and label are synonyms. The understanding of whatever the languages—whatever the expressions in the hells, among the animals, of humans, and of gods and so on—is “knowledge in accord with sound.”
13. Great Vehicle of the three faculties
“The three faculties”—
the three faculties are the Great Vehicle because they are the differentiators of the generators those in the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles use for purification dharmas.
“The faculty of coming to understand what one does not understand” 
facilitates the path of seeing; 
“the faculty of understanding”
facilitates both; and 
“the faculty of having understood”
facilitates the nontrainee path. 
“Without appearances that tame the arrogance”—
it says “without appearances” because for bodhisattvas on the path of seeing there is no appearance of any phenomenon apart from suchness. It says “tame the arrogance” because it eliminates the afflictions. 
14. Great Vehicle of the three meditative stabilizations
These are
“the meditative stabilization with applied thought and with sustained thought”
and so on. There are three meditative stabilizations because there has to be a realization of gross, middling, and subtle movement of thought. “With applied thought and with sustained thought” is the gross; 
“without applied thought with only sustained thought”
is the middling; and 
“without either applied or sustained thought”
is the subtle. 
15–16. Great Vehicle of the mindfulnesses and the five absorptions
The mindfulnesses… concentrations… and immeasurables and so on are to bring beings to maturity, to gather them, to gain control over them, and to bring the buddhadharmas to maturity and so on.
 Among them
“the four immeasurables”
are “immeasurable” because they focus on immeasurable beings, are the cause of an immeasurable accumulation, are the cause of the attainment of immeasurable dharmas, and are the object of an immeasurable knowledge. 
 There, there are three types of love: the one that takes beings as its objective support on the devoted course of conduct level, the one that takes suchness as its objective support on the first to the seventh levels, and from the eighth level on up the one that does not apprehend anything. 
 There are also three types of compassion: the one that takes suffering beings as its objective support, the one that takes beings who are involved in much misconduct as its objective support, and the one that takes beings without the necessary conditions for freedom as its objective support. 
 There are also three types of joy: the one that takes happy beings as its objective support, the one that takes those who have accumulated their collections as its objective support, and the one that takes those who have experienced the taste of the good doctrine  as its objective support. 
 And there are also three types of equanimity: the one that, when conducting themselves for the welfare of others, apprehends those who are fortunate and those without good fortune; the one that apprehends in a state of equanimity the conditions of attaining and not attaining and so on governing an ordinary person’s life; and the one that apprehends, in respect to the completion of the accumulations, when is and is not the time. 
 There,
“a mind endowed with love”
teaches that it is endowed with good qualities; 
“vast”
and so on teaches the actual good qualities. Again, the good qualities are three: greatness, unity, and the elimination of enmity. It teaches that the mind is great in three ways: because of intention, increase, and objective support. There it is great because of its intention so it says “vast”; it is great because of its increase so it says 
“inclusive”; 
and because it has immeasurable beings for its objective support it is great because of its objective support, so it says 
“infinite.”
It is a unity because it is without thought construction and in the form of love alone, so it says 
“nondual.”
Because it functions to counteract violence it is not harmed by inner dharmas, so it says
“without enmity”;
because it is not harmed by outer beings it says
“unrivaled”;
because it is not harmed by external and karmically occasioned things it says
“not harmful,”
which is to say, it is not harmed by attachments, poisons, fire and so on.
 As for 
“the four concentrations,”
the first is
“detached from sense objects,”
detached from both sense objects—from the afflictive emotion of desire, and from the bases—because of detachment from a state accompanied by it and because of detachment from having those bases as its objective support. 
“Detached from wrong unwholesome dharmas”
is detachment from what is included in physical, verbal, and mental wrongdoing: harsh punishments, striking with weapons,  wars, arguments, battles, making deceitful statements, harming, lying and so on—anything caused by the afflictive emotion of desire. Because of not seeing 
“applied thought and sustained thought”
as faults, this concentration that counteracts desire for sense gratification is accompanied by those two. 
“Born of detachment”—
it is born of detachment from sense objects or from being detached from wrongdoing.
It has
“joy and happiness”
because the body and mind are pliable, and do what they do with a sense of ease, because, having reached the desired goal, it is separated from all the defective states.
 In the second concentration, having seen the causal signs of the meditative stabilization as faulted by the presence of applied and sustained thought, the mind recoils from them. Having made the causal signs of the meditative stabilization without applied and sustained thought attractive to the mind, and separated it from being distracted by distracting objects, the mind, focused single-pointedly in a unified fashion, is calm and placed in a serene confidence. Therefore, it says
“relieved of applied thought and sustained thought, with an inner serene confidence.”
With the mind thus settled close by, having passed beyond the danger from applied and sustained thought and states where they are an obstruction, because of habituation to the meditation they attain a state where the danger and obstruction do not exist. Therefore, it says
“and a mind that has become a single continuum.”
They are 
“without applied thought and without sustained thought”
because they have eliminated, in each and every way, applied and sustained thought.
 In the third concentration, 
“because they are free from attachment to joy they abide in equanimity, and with equanimity and recollection and introspection experience happiness with their body.”
For those who think abiding in equanimity, and experiencing pleasure, are mutually exclusive, it teaches a practice where  they do not exclude each other. In this concentration, applied and sustained thought have been eliminated, as well as enjoyment, so without obstructions they “abide in equanimity.” Furthermore, in order not to open up any opportunities for paying attention to perceptions of enjoyment they remain mindful. In order not to cause those that have been produced to arise, as they have again and again, they remain at their post with wisdom. Therefore it says 
“with recollection and introspection.”
Thus in equanimity, those staying at their post, having eliminated the feeling of enjoyment that causes the mind to become distracted, produce a feeling of extreme calm, a calm in which there is no enjoyment, and that also at that time causes an experience of a pleasurable feeling and an experience of the pleasure of pliancy in their physical body and mental body. Thus it says
“experience pleasure with their body… about which the noble beings say, ‘They have equanimity and recollection and dwell in pleasure.’ ”
In the lower two concentrations such pleasure and equanimity do not exist. In the one above, equanimity but not pleasure exists. Therefore, since just this third concentration is the abode of pleasure and equanimity, the buddhas and the buddhas’ śrāvakas say primarily of just those in this concentration that “they have equanimity and recollection and dwell in pleasure.”
 In the fourth concentration 
“they have forsaken pleasure.”
This teaches that this fourth concentration has forsaken the pleasure with which the third concentration is endowed. That they also 
“have earlier forsaken suffering”
includes in the explanation what has been forsaken by the second concentration. That they “earlier”
“set to rest mental happiness”
teaches that enjoyment has been forsaken in the third concentration. That they “set to rest”
“mental unhappiness”
teaches that it has been forsaken by the second concentration as well. Because an extremely purified  equanimity, recollection, and introspection are obtained here, what have been forsaken earlier are included.
 Because these four feelings have been forsaken it also has a feeling beyond them that is neither pleasure nor suffering, so it says 
“that is neither happiness nor suffering.”
“Extremely pure equanimity and recollection”
teaches the cause of the fourth concentration’s immovability. 
 As for the teaching about the four formless absorptions,
“totally transcending perceptions of form” 
teaches that color perceptions endowed with blue, yellow, red, white and so on have become nonexistent because they are disgusted by them and separate from attachment to them through an increase in admiration for the space-like. Hence, on account of habituation to the meditation on an admiration for the space-like, they transcend those perceptions of form and so on, and all the perceptions of obstruction from pillars, walls, planks and so on, caused by many various layers of colors, do not arise, so it says
“setting to rest perceptions of obstruction.”
When they have disappeared, the energy in the various perceptions of food, drink, vehicles, clothes, ornaments, homes, parks, mountains and so on that are expressed in many various forms stops operating, so it says, 
“not paying attention to perceptions of difference.”
Because all those perceptions apprehending form have been destroyed, an admiration in the form of endless space comes about, so it says
“in endless space they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of endless space.”
“Totally transcending the station of endless space, in endless consciousness”— 
that consciousness on account of which the consciousness that is an admiration in the form of endless space is an admiration in the form of endless space—having taken that itself as endless,  they want to become absorbed in the station of endless consciousness, so they recoil from the perception of the station of endless space and admire the state of consciousness as endless. Therefore, it says endless consciousness. 
“Totally transcending the station of endless consciousness”—
they move off from endless consciousness, and when they search for some other objective support besides consciousness they find nothing material or nonmaterial at all. When they do not find that objective support they transcend even the station of endless consciousness. They take just the station of nothing-at-all as their objective support and, having meditated on it, become absorbed in it. Therefore, it says
“in nothing-at-all they perfectly accomplish and dwell in the station of nothing-at-all.”
“Totally transcending the station of nothing-at-all”—
having come to see the perception of the station of nothing-at-all as flawed by grossness, they recoil from the perception of the station of nothing-at-all. Earlier, during the period of absorption into the station of nothing-at-all they recoiled from the perception of something being there. Now they recoil from the perception of nothing at all, so it is
“neither perception,”
which is to say, it is not like a mindless absorption in which there is the cessation of all perceptions in each and every way, but rather the emergence of a perception without causal signs, because it is extremely subtle. Therefore, it says
“nor nonperception.”
 As for the teaching about the eight deliverances,
“with form they see forms”
means they have reached the absorption that apprehends inner form and are absorbed in apprehending outer forms. Of them, furthermore, it will be explained that the two earlier deliverances  are just the unpleasantness, which is to say they are in their nature the first and second concentrations. The third deliverance is in its nature the fourth concentration and furthermore has nonattachment as its intrinsic nature. 
 About these, furthermore, having become absorbed in the first concentration, the absorption that apprehends hair and so on, which counteracts the attachment those living in the desire realm have to color, when they then take a black and blue corpse and so on outside as their objective support and enter into absorption in the first concentration, it is said “with form they see forms.” Similarly, when they enter into absorption in the second concentration, which counteracts the attachment of those at the first concentration level to color, it is also said “with form they see forms.” It says “with form” based on their apprehending inner form, and it says “they see forms” based on the absorption apprehending outer forms. 
 As for the second, 
“with the perception of form inside, they see forms outside”
means when certain yogic practitioners not absorbed in the absorption apprehending hair and so on inside, apprehend a black and blue corpse and so on outside, they become absorbed in the first concentration, which counteracts the attachment those living in the desire realm have to color, or in the second concentration, which counteracts the attachment of those at the first concentration level to color. 
“They have admiration for the pleasant”
is the pleasant deliverance. They cultivate it in order to make themselves feel joy when their minds are cowed from having meditated on the unpleasant, or, when they pay attention to their own pleasing form as in fact pleasing, to see whether, based on an attachment to color and so on, their minds change or do not change. So, taking a beautiful form and so on as their objective support and becoming absorbed in the fourth concentration is called “admiration for the pleasant.” It is said that even though  there is no conceptualization of “pleasant” and so on in the moment of absorption, the locution is used governed by it being there earlier. 
 I have already explained the formless deliverances.
“The nine serial absorptions”
are the eight—the concentrations and the formless absorptions—and the cessation of perceptions and feelings.
17. Great Vehicle of the ten powers
In regard to the ten powers of a tathāgata, they are the following.
First power
“Accurately knowing the possible as possible, and accurately knowing the impossible as impossible.”
There, what is “the possible” and what is “the impossible”?
 An unpleasant maturation from wrongdoing is possible; a pleasant maturation is impossible. A pleasant maturation from good deeds is possible; an unpleasant maturation is impossible.
 Poverty from miserliness is possible; great wealth is impossible. Great wealth from giving is possible; poverty is impossible.
 Birth in a bad form of life from immorality is possible; birth in a good form of life is impossible. Birth in a good form of life from morality is possible; birth in a bad form of life is impossible. 
 Physical ugliness from malice is possible; physical beauty is impossible. Beauty from patience is possible; ugliness is impossible. 
 No clear realization from laziness is possible; clear realization is impossible. Clear realization of the truths from perseverance is possible; not clearly realizing the truths is impossible. 
 Not entering into the secure state from distraction is possible; entering into the secure state is impossible. Entering into true reality through concentration is possible; not entering is impossible. 
 Not reaching awakening with intellectual confusion is possible; reaching awakening is impossible. Reaching awakening with wisdom is possible; not reaching awakening is impossible. 
 Having a short life from killing is possible; having a long life is impossible. Having a long life from abandoning that is possible; having a short life is impossible. 
 Gaining great wealth from stealing is impossible; poverty is possible. Gaining wealth from abandoning that is possible; poverty is impossible. 
 Finding a wife who you have to compete for from adultery is possible; finding a wife who you do not have to compete for is impossible. Finding a wife who you do not have to compete for from abandoning that adultery is possible; not finding a wife who you do not have to compete for is impossible.
 Getting slandered is possible from lying; not getting slandered is impossible. Not getting slandered from abandoning that is possible; getting slandered from abandoning that is impossible. 
 Not getting unity from speaking behind a person’s back is possible; getting it is impossible. Getting unity from abandoning that is possible; not getting it is impossible. 
 Always hearing something unpleasant from shouting is possible; not hearing that is impossible. Always hearing something pleasant from abandoning that is possible; not hearing that is impossible. 
 Your words not being treated with respect from idle chatter is possible; your words being treated with respect is impossible. Your words being treated with respect from abandoning that is possible; your words not being treated with respect is impossible. 
 Wealth dissipating from covetousness is possible; its not dissipating is impossible. Wealth not dissipating from abandoning that is possible; its dissipating is impossible. 
 Going to hell from malice is possible; going to a good form of life is impossible. Going to a good form of life is possible from abandoning that.
 Not reaching the noble path with a wrong view is possible;  reaching it is impossible. Reaching the noble path with a right view is possible; not reaching it is impossible. 
 Not obtaining the meditative stabilizations from a crime that brings immediate retribution is possible; obtaining them is impossible. Obtaining them from being moral is possible; not obtaining them is impossible. 
 Not obtaining forbearance in accord with the four noble truths with a view that apprehends something is possible; obtaining it is impossible. Obtaining forbearance in accord with the four noble truths from abiding in emptiness is possible; not obtaining it is impossible.
 A girl who might become a wheel-turning emperor, or an Indra, Brahmā, Vaśavartin, or buddha, is impossible; a boy who might become one of those is possible.
 An eighth person who gets up from his seat without having gained the result of stream enterer is impossible; one who gets up having gained the result of stream enterer is possible. A once-returner who takes a third existence is impossible; one who does not take one is possible. A non-returner who returns to this world is impossible; one who does not return is possible. A worthy one who links up with another existence under the force of afflictions and karma is impossible; one who does not is possible. 
 A noble person who searches for another teacher is impossible; one who does not is possible. 
 That bodhisattvas who have obtained forbearance for dharmas that are not produced are irreversible is possible; that they are reversible is impossible. That bodhisattvas seated  at the site of awakening will get up from their seat before fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is impossible; that they will get up fully awakened is possible. 
 That there are residual impression connections in a buddha is impossible; that they have been eliminated completely is possible. That the knowledge of a tathāgata is obstructed by anything at all is impossible; that it is totally unobstructed is possible. That anyone sees the top of a tathāgata’s head is impossible; that nobody sees the top of a tathāgata’s head is possible. That tathāgatas appear to change their minds is impossible; that they do not appear to do so is possible. That the minds of tathāgatas might become distracted is impossible; that they are always in meditative equipoise is possible. That tathāgatas might speak falsely is impossible; that they would not speak falsely is possible. That there might be a mistake in what the buddhas say is impossible; that there never is, is possible. That tathāgatas would fear or be scared of anything is impossible; that tathāgatas are totally without fear and not scared by anything is possible. 
 Those and so on are “possible and impossible.” Knowledge of those is “the power of knowing what is and is not possible.”
Second power 
“The power of knowing the maturation of action.” 
This is the knowledge of the lords with which they 
“know from the perspective of place and cause the maturations of actions and the undertaking of actions.”
There is, for instance, the past undertaking of action arisen from a wholesome cause and separated from an unwholesome one, and the outcome of the wholesome cause in the future. There is also, contingent on a superior one in the present, the undertaking of an action arisen from an unwholesome cause and separated from a wholesome one, and the outcome of the unwholesome cause in the future. There are also, contingent on an inferior one in the past, those that will be contingent on a superior one in the future. There are also, contingent on an inferior one in the present, those that will be contingent on a superior one in the future. There are also, contingent on a superior one in the present, those that will be contingent on an inferior one in the future. There are also, in the present and the future, those that will be contingent on an inferior one. There are also, in the present and the future, those that will be contingent on a superior one. And there are also the slight preparation in the past that will be an immense preparation in the future and the immense preparation in the past that will be a slight preparation in the future; as well as the small undertaking that becomes extremely special; the great undertaking that becomes much less special; the undertaking of action that is the cause of becoming a śrāvaka, the cause of becoming a pratyekabuddha, or the cause of becoming a buddha; that is done with suffering in the present and that matures into pleasure in the future; that is done with pleasure in the present and that matures into suffering in the future; that is done with suffering in the present and that matures into suffering in the future as well; and that is done with pleasure in the present and that matures into pleasure in the future as well. Thus, whatever the action, whatever the cause, whatever the maturation of all beings in times past, future, and present—the tathāgata knows them all.
Third power
“The world with its various constituents and multiplicity of constituents”—
they know with which disposition constituent there is an accumulation of the enactment of ordinary merit, and with which disposition constituent there is an accumulation of the immovable, an accumulation of births, an accumulation of freedom from attachment, an accumulation of afflictions, an accumulation of views, an accumulation of definite emergence, an accumulation of the causes of becoming a śrāvaka, an accumulation of the causes of becoming a pratyekabuddha, an accumulation of the causes of becoming a buddha, an accumulation of the causes of arising,  and an accumulation of the causes of destruction.
 They know that the eye constituent, form constituent, and eye consciousness constituent, up to the thinking-mind constituent, dharma constituent, and thinking-mind consciousness constituent, are inner emptinesses, outer emptinesses, and inner and outer emptinesses; they know that the earth element, water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element are like a magical illusion and a dream. 
 They know the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm that come about from the falsely imagined unreal. 
 They know that the compounded element is marked as brought about by the falsely imagined, and that the uncompounded element is marked as not being brought about.
 They know that the defilement element is marked by being plucked out of thin air, and that the purification element is marked by the nature of clear light. 
 They know that the compounded element is marked by ignorance that is not fundamental, and that the nirvāṇa element is marked by being fundamental awareness. They know and teach dharmas like those. 
 This is the power of knowing “various constituents.”
Fourth power
“Accurately knowing the various beliefs and the many beliefs of other beings and other persons.” 
They know who has an inherited disposition for attachment but an inclination to anger; an inherited disposition for anger but an inclination to attachment; an inherited disposition for attachment but an inclination to ignorance; an inherited disposition for ignorance but an inclination to attachment; an inherited disposition for anger but an inclination to ignorance; an inherited disposition for ignorance but an inclination to anger; an inherited disposition for attachment and an inclination to attachment; an inherited disposition for anger and an inclination to anger;  an inherited disposition for ignorance and an inclination to ignorance; an inherited disposition for attachment and anger and an inclination to attachment and anger; an inherited disposition for attachment but an inclination to attachment and ignorance; an inherited disposition for attachment but an inclination to anger and ignorance; an inherited disposition for anger but an inclination to attachment and ignorance; an inherited disposition for anger but an inclination to attachment and anger; an inherited disposition for attachment and ignorance but an inclination to attachment; an inherited disposition for attachment but an inclination to attachment and ignorance; an inherited disposition for anger but an inclination to attachment and ignorance; an inherited disposition for attachment and ignorance but an inclination to anger; an inherited disposition for attachment and anger but an inclination to ignorance; an inherited disposition for ignorance but an inclination to attachment and anger; an inherited disposition for attachment and anger and an inclination to attachment and anger; an inherited disposition for attachment and ignorance and an inclination to attachment and ignorance; an inherited disposition for anger and ignorance and an inclination to anger and ignorance; an inherited disposition for attachment, anger, and ignorance and an inclination to attachment, anger, and ignorance; an inherited disposition for attachment but an inclination to pride; an inherited disposition for anger but an inclination to pride; an inherited disposition for ignorance but an inclination to pride; an inherited disposition for pride and an inclination to pride; an inherited disposition for pride but an inclination to attachment; an inherited disposition for pride but an inclination to anger; an inherited disposition for pride but an inclination to ignorance; an inherited disposition for pride but an inclination to attachment and anger; an inherited disposition for pride but an inclination to attachment and ignorance; an inherited disposition for pride but an inclination to attachment, anger, and ignorance; an inherited disposition for attachment and anger but an inclination to pride; an inherited disposition for attachment and ignorance but an inclination to pride;  an inherited disposition for anger and ignorance but an inclination to pride; an inherited disposition for attachment but an inclination to wrong view; an inherited disposition for anger but an inclination to wrong view; an inherited disposition for ignorance but an inclination to wrong view; an inherited disposition for pride but an inclination to wrong view; an inherited disposition for wrong view and an inclination to wrong view; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to attachment; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to anger; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to ignorance; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to pride; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to attachment and anger; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to attachment and ignorance; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to attachment and pride; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to attachment and wrong view; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to anger and ignorance; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to anger and pride; an inherited disposition for anger but an inclination to anger and wrong view; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to ignorance and wrong view; an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to ignorance and pride; and an inherited disposition for wrong view but an inclination to pride and wrong view. They know those types, and, similarly, those with an inherited disposition for the unwholesome but an inclination to the wholesome; an inherited disposition for the wholesome but an inclination to the unwholesome; an inherited disposition for the unwholesome and an inclination to the unwholesome; an inherited disposition for the wholesome and an inclination to the wholesome; as well as those short on execution but big on inclination; big on execution but short on inclination; big on execution and big on inclination as well; short on execution and short on inclination as well; as well as those with a belief that makes them destined to be wrong; with a belief that makes them destined to be correct; with an inclination to move to the desire realm, an inclination to move to the form realm, an inclination to move to the formless realm, an inclination to transcend the desire realm, an inclination to transcend  the form realm, an inclination to transcend the formless realm, and an inclination to transcend all three realms; those with an inclination to move from what is based on the inferior to what is based on the superior; an inclination to move from what is based on the superior to what is based on the inferior; an inclination to move from what is based on the inferior to what is based on the inferior; an inclination to move from what is based on the superior to what is based on the superior; and an inclination to existence, an inclination to escape, an inclination to the state of a śrāvaka, and an inclination to the state of a pratyekabuddha. 
 They know types such as those and so on. This is the power of knowing “various inclinations.”
Fifth power
“Accurately knowing the stages of faculties and perseverance of other beings and other persons.”
They know dull faculties, middling faculties, sharp faculties, having no faculties, inferior faculties, and superior faculties; that this faculty of imagination gives rise to attachment, this to anger, this to stupidity, this to pride, and this to wrong views; that this gives rise to small afflictions, this gives rise to middling afflictions, and this gives rise to big afflictions; that this makes for good fortune, and this makes for an absence of good fortune; that with this they reach maturity, and with this they reach maturity for the time being; that with this faults become small, and with this they become small for the time being; that this gives rise to the wholesome and so on, this to objects of the senses, this to what is included in form, and this to what is included in the formless; that this gives rise to birth, this to freedom from attachment, this to calm abiding, this to special insight, this to a stream enterer, this to being temporarily obstructed  by seven suffering existences, this to having a single interruption, and this to being born in family after family and so on. They know types such as those and so on, and that this gives rise to the devoted course of conduct level, this the Pramuditā, and this the Vimalā and so on; and that this gives rise to the completion of the perfections, this to meditation on the dharmas on the side of awakening, this to bringing beings to maturity, this to the purification of a buddhafield, this to the forbearance for dharmas that are not produced, this to obtaining many types of meditative stabilization, this to obtaining the dhāraṇī doors, this to obtaining the clairvoyances, and this to obtaining the faculties and so on. 
 They know those with a faculty for giving who are practicing morality, and with a faculty for morality who are practicing giving; those with a faculty for giving who are practicing patience, and with a faculty for patience who are practicing giving; those with a faculty for morality who are practicing patience, and with a faculty for patience who are practicing morality; those with a faculty for giving who are practicing perseverance, and with a faculty for perseverance who are practicing giving; those with a faculty for morality who are practicing perseverance, and with a faculty for perseverance who are practicing morality; those with a faculty for patience who are practicing perseverance, and with a faculty for perseverance who are practicing patience; those with a faculty for perseverance who are practicing concentration, and with a faculty for concentration who are practicing perseverance; those with a faculty for concentration who are practicing giving, and with a faculty for giving who are practicing concentration; those with a faculty for concentration who are practicing morality, and with a faculty for morality  who are practicing concentration; those with a faculty for concentration who are practicing patience, and with a faculty for patience who are practicing concentration; those with a faculty for wisdom who are practicing giving, and with a faculty for giving who are practicing wisdom; those with a faculty for wisdom who are practicing morality, and with a faculty for morality who are practicing wisdom; those with a faculty for wisdom who are practicing patience, and with a faculty for patience who are practicing wisdom; those with a faculty for wisdom who are practicing perseverance, and with a faculty for perseverance who are practicing wisdom; and those with a faculty for wisdom who are practicing concentration, and with a faculty for concentration who are practicing wisdom. 
 They know and teach the appropriate doctrine to any of those with a faculty for the applications of mindfulness who are practicing the right abandonments, to any of those with a faculty for the right abandonments who are practicing the applications of mindfulness, and so on (connect the dharmas on the side of awakening like that); to any of those with a faculty for inner emptiness who are abiding in outer emptiness and so on (connect all the emptinesses like that); to any of those with the faculty of a śrāvaka who are practicing a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, to any of those with the faculty for a pratyekabuddha’s awakening whose practice would make them śrāvakas, to any of those with the faculty of a śrāvaka whose practice would make them pratyekabuddhas, to any of those with the faculty of a pratyekabuddha whose practices would make them śrāvakas, to any of those with the faculty for a pratyekabuddha’s awakening whose practice would make them buddhas, and to any of those with the faculty of a buddha whose practice would lead to a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; and to any of those with the faculty for saṃsāra whose practices are for escape, and to any of those with the faculty for escape whose practice is for saṃsāra.
 This is the power of knowing “higher and lower faculties.”
Sixth power
“Accurately knowing the path wherever it goes.”
Here the tathāgatas know the basic character of beings who are destined to be correct, and the basic character of beings destined and not necessarily destined to be wrong. They also know the paths that harmonize with those destined and not necessarily destined for perfection. In regard to those destined to be wrong, they know what is in harmony with what they do, while staying aloof. The bodhisattvas don armor for their sake. 
 They also know the threefold path of attachment. They know there is a path of attachment that comes about from something nice-looking; and a path of attachment that comes about when somebody is nice; and a path of attachment that comes about from the power of habituation in an earlier life. They also know there is a path of anger that comes about from the object of a malicious thought; similarly that is a wrath that comes about from something indicating [an object of an intense dislike]; and that comes about from a prior cause. And they know there is a path of confusion that comes about with ignorance as the cause, that comes about with the view of the true body as the cause, and that comes about with doubt as the cause. They also know there is a slow path where clairvoyance is easy, and a quick path where clairvoyance is hard; a quick path where clairvoyance is easy, and a slow path where clairvoyance is hard; a path that fully completes the power of analysis but not the power of meditation, a path that fully completes the power of meditation but not the power of analysis, a path that fully completes them both, and one that does not fully complete them both; and also a path where the intention is perfect but the execution is not perfect, a path where the execution is perfect but the intention is not perfect, a path where both are perfect,  and one where both are not perfect; and also a path that purifies body but does not purify speech and mind, one that purifies speech but does not purify body and mind, one that purifies thinking mind but does not purify body and speech, and one that purifies body and speech but does not purify mind; and also one that purifies mind but does not purify body and speech; and also one that purifies body and mind but does not purify speech, and one that purifies body and speech but does not purify thinking mind, and one that does not purify any of them. They know a path of suffering here that becomes happiness beyond; a path of happiness here that becomes suffering beyond; one where there is suffering in both, and one where there is happiness in both; a path that is of benefit to themselves but not of benefit to others, of benefit to others but not of benefit to themselves, of benefit to both, and that does not benefit either; and also a path that results in the desire realm, that counteracts attachment to the objects of the senses; a path that results in the form realm, that counteracts attachment to form; a path that results in the formless realm, that counteracts attachment to formlessness; one with suffering existence as a result, with escape as a result, with a śrāvaka as a result, with a pratyekabuddha’s awakening as a result, and with a buddha as a result; a path of those predestined, and one of those not predestined; one that counteracts attachment to wrongdoing, counteracts obsession, counteracts residual impressions, counteracts attachment, counteracts anger, counteracts confusion,  counteracts pride, and counteracts views; and one that is a practice for accomplishing calm abiding, a practice for accomplishing special insight, a practice for accomplishing the perfections, a practice of cultivating the side of awakening, a practice that brings beings to maturity, a practice that brings the buddhadharmas to maturity, a practice for accomplishing the purification of a buddhafield, a practice that accomplishes the preparations for the levels, a practice for accomplishing clairvoyance, a practice for accomplishing the faculties, a practice for completely accomplishing the accumulation of merit, and a practice for accomplishing the accumulation of knowledge. 
 This is the power of knowing “the path that goes everywhere.” 
Seventh power
“Accurately knowing the defilement and purification of all concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions.”
They know all the four concentrations—the first concentration and so on—the three meditative stabilizations that have applied thought and have sustained thought and so on, the four formless absorptions, and the nine serial absorptions, as well as their defilement and the cause of their defilement, their purification and the cause of their purification, and the causes of emergence from them.
 There, the concentrations and so on become defiled through the power of improper attention, dedication to suffering existence, having various views, having an experience of the taste, and paying attention to an objective support. The concentrations and so on  that are absorbed in the branches of a concentration for special insight or for bringing beings to maturity, or that accomplish the clairvoyances or pay attention without an objective support and so on, become purified.
“The emergence”
comes about through the power of absorption in the siṃha­vijṛmbhita and avaskandhaka meditative stabilizations in direct and reverse order. Here tathāgatas are always in meditative equipoise, absorbed in meditative stabilization. Even if the meditative stabilization is singular, they become absorbed in and emerge from all meditative stabilizations. They demonstrate one meditative stabilization inside all the meditative stabilizations and emerge from it, just as it is found in the Sūtra.
 A single meditative stabilization, furthermore, does the work of all meditative stabilizations, and many meditative stabilizations do the work of a single meditative stabilization. They demonstrate a single emergence from all meditative stabilizations, demonstrate a variety of emergences from a variety of meditative stabilizations, and they demonstrate a single meditative stabilization from a variety of emergences. You can grasp these and so on as they are found in the Sūtra.
 This is the power that “knows concentrations, deliverances, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions.”
Eighth to tenth powers
You should comprehend the power of
“recollecting and knowing… previous lives”;
the power that knows
“the divine eye,”
clairvoyance; and the power that knows
“an end to outflows,”
just as they are found in the scripture.
18. Great Vehicle of the four fearlessnesses
“The four fearlessnesses”—
the first and second take their own welfare as their point of departure; the third and fourth take the welfare of others as their point of departure.
“Those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins,”
and so on—they are called “those leading a secluded religious life, and brahmins” because their wisdom makes them conceited. Others are called 
“the gods, [and] Māra”
because they have the perfect divine eye and know what others are thinking and so on. Others are called 
“Brahmā”
because of their miraculous powers  and because they are incredibly powerful.
“I see no cause”—
in the sense that they do not see any contradiction at all that would turn into a reason to
“argue”
with them.
“I, who have found happiness”
teaches their body hair bristles—that they are not nervous and so on. On account of that, they announce that theirs is 
“the status of the dominant bull,”
a thoroughbred, because their physical actions are completely purified. 
“Found fearlessness”
teaches they are not cowed and do not feel trepidation and so on when it comes to speaking. On account of that they
“roar”
like
“the lion,”
because their verbal action is completely purified. 
“Found a ground for self-confidence”
teaches they have no doubt or feeling of being cowed in their minds. On account of that they,
“Brahmā-like, turn the wheel”
because their mental actions are completely purified. 
 Similarly, connect these with them all.
19. Great Vehicle of the four detailed and thorough knowledges
“The detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas, detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings”—
realization as the speech of a tathāgata is the many scriptures in the form of the collections of statements, collections of names, and collections of syllables. It is detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas because on account of it detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas comes about, or because it is detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas. The “meanings” are the collections of subject matter. The knowledge of those is “the detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings.” 
 Alternatively, “dharmas” are all cause and condition dharmas. The knowledge of them is “detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas.” The knowledge of all the dharmas that are dependently originated results is “detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings.”
 Alternatively, “dharmas” are wholesome and unwholesome dharmas that have maturations. The knowledge of them is “detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas.” The “meanings” are obscured, unobscured, and neutral dharmas. The knowledge of those is “detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings.”
 Alternatively, “dharmas” are all the dharmas  that are defilement and purification side dharmas when the truths of origination and the path are realized. The knowledge of them is “detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas.” The “meanings” are all the dharmas included in the truth of suffering and the truth of cessation. The knowledge of those is “detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings.” 
 Alternatively, “dharmas” are all the intentions, tendencies, behaviors, beliefs, faculties, and so on of trainees. The knowledge of them is “detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas.” The “meanings” are trainees who understand by way of a brief indication and by detailed explanation, those who need to be led and who are literalists, those who have big and little afflictions, those who have sharp and dull faculties, and those who have good fortune and have no good fortune, and so on. The knowledge of those is “detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings.” 
“Creative explanations”—
“creative explanation” is the ascertainment of statements through just those many sorts of collections of names, and so on, well known in the world. Alternatively, “creative explanation” dharmas are all the sounds and expressions of humans living on the eighteen big continents, living in the sixteen major countries, living in the ninety-eight outer surrounding territories, and in the central country; of all animals in their birthplaces, of ghosts, and beings in the hells; of all asuras, nāgas, gandharvas, and kiṃnaras; of siddhas and mantradhāras; of musicians and actors and so on; of the desire realm gods of the Cāturmahā­rājika, Trāyastriṃśa and so on; of all the classes of Māras; and of all the classes of Brahmā and Śuddhāvāsa gods. The knowledge of those is “detailed and thorough knowledge of creative explanations.” 
 The knowledge of just those three sorts of knowledge is 
“detailed and thorough knowledge  of confidence giving readiness to speak.”
The perfect demonstration, knowledge, and mastery of doctrine in harmony with the intentions and tendencies of those same beings is “detailed and thorough knowledge of confidence giving readiness to speak.”
 In just a single instant, with the detailed and thorough knowledge of dharmas bodhisattvas take up perfectly the unbroken flows of the streams of doctrine of all buddhas that emerge in all regions of the world; in that very same instant, with the detailed and thorough knowledge of meanings they also take up the meanings of those doctrines; in that very same instant, with the detailed and thorough knowledge of creative explanations they demonstrate the doctrine with various creative explanations for various trainees in various regions of world; and with the detailed and thorough knowledge of confidence giving readiness to speak they cause those trainees to take up the true nature of dharmas directly. 
20. Great Vehicle of the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha
As for the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, tathāgatas
“do not go wrong.”
In their activities they do not go wrong physically, verbally, or mentally. 
When worthy ones go to town and so on to beg food they are hurt by savage elephants, horses, bulls, and dogs, and by thorn bushes, poisonous snakes and so on; in the jungle they get scared by robbers, tigers, and leopards. Tathāgatas never go wrong from a lack of knowledge in these ways that worthy ones do. Tathāgatas are never robbed of mindfulness; they undertake activities for beings and are never found to be at fault.
The ways tathāgatas carry themselves beautify the world. Looking around, peering, pulled in, and stretched out and so on, they make all humans, gods, and Brahmās, and even all animals, feel content. Thus, always while going and coming and so on  the soles of their feet do not touch the ground. Tathāgatas leave footprints of thousand-spoked wheels on the earth, and wherever they place their feet fragrant lotuses spring up. Even if an animal is touched by their feet, it feels content with a supreme pleasure for seven days, and even if it dies it is born in a good form of life such as a heaven. Clothes do not touch the tathāgatas’ bodies by four finger-widths and even a gusty wind cannot move them. The light from their bodies brings pleasure to all beings, even to those as far away as the Avīci hell. Hence, it says “tathāgatas do not go wrong physically.” 
 They also do not go wrong verbally because they speak at the right time, speak truthfully, speak pleasantly, and speak faultlessly. Their speech is separated from all faults because they do not needlessly repeat themselves, and they speak definitively, speak logically, and with a single statement cause all beings to understand in a single instant. 
 They also do not go wrong mentally because they are always in meditative absorption, are not robbed of mindfulness, and they know all dharmas—having no attachments or obscurations with respect to them—always seeing and acting spontaneously and without thought construction. 
 Thus, it says tathāgatas “do not go wrong.” This is the first distinct attribute.
“[They] do not shout out.”
When worthy ones wander off the path in the forest they yell and shout out, or, because of the force of habit, bray out laughing or get the syllables in words wrong. Buddhas do not shout out like that because they do not get attached to or angry at any beings or any dharmas, and they have transcended all worldly dharmas, are always  in meditative equipoise, dwell without afflictions, and have destroyed all residual impressions. 
 Thus, it says “do not shout out.” This is the second distinct attribute.
“[They] are not robbed of mindfulness.”
Tathāgatas are not like worthy ones who forget and drop the task at hand when they do not think about it and miss the opportunity, because they are never robbed of mindfulness when it comes to all the needs of beings, all dharmas, and all their activities. Thus, it says “not robbed of mindfulness.” This is the third distinct attribute.
“[They] do not have uncollected thoughts.”
Worthy ones are in equipoise only when they are in meditative absorption, not at other times. Tathāgatas are not thus—whether they are in meditative absorption or not in meditative absorption, they are always in equipoise because they have completed the supreme, deep meditative stabilizations. This is the fourth distinct attribute. 
“[They] do not discriminate differences.”
Worthy ones see saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, defilement and purification dharmas, and so on as different. Tathāgatas do not. Tathāgatas always see beings as being the same, and dharmas as being the same. Governed by compassion and governed by nonconceptual knowledge, they do not discriminate a difference between saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, or bright and dark dharmas, or moral and immoral, or helpful and harmful, or destined for perfection and destined for wrong, or the finest beings and the lowest beings.  This is the fifth distinct attribute. 
“[They] are not inconsiderately dispassionate.”
Unlike worthy ones who inconsiderately ignore the welfare of beings, tathāgatas do not do so. They deem it something they can ignore only after considering what is and is not the right time, who has good fortune and who has no good fortune, and when it is not in vain and when it is in vain, not otherwise. This is the sixth. 
“[They] are not deficient in yearning, are not deficient in perseverance, are not deficient in recollection, are not deficient in meditative stabilization, are not deficient in wisdom, are not deficient in liberation, and are not deficient in the insight into knowledge of liberation.”
Worthy ones, because of their nature, do not have the “yearning” for the activities of buddhas because based on their range such things are naturally done by buddhas. They have yearning for just the activities of śrāvakas. Similarly, śrāvakas do not have buddha-level “perseverance, recollection, meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation,” because they are “deficient” insofar as they do not obtain the seven dharmas, yearning and so on. Buddhas, though, have gained the special attributes. Because they have comprehended all dharmas they are not deficient in the slightest. This is because buddhas have an unbroken desire to do what is necessary for the welfare of all beings at all times; they have the desire to bring about within themselves the attributes of great love and great compassion and so on; and they have the unbroken desire to explain the doctrine, bring beings to maturity, and, having roused the thought of awakening, make unbroken the continuity of the Three Jewels. 
 Tathāgatas “persevere”  in everything. They never get physically tired and never get mentally tired. Tathāgatas teach the doctrine for the sake of a single being even for eons without taking a break; having passed through as many buddhafields as there are grains of sand in the Gaṅgā River, they go wherever there are beings for the buddhas to train.
 Tathāgatas are “not deficient in recollection” either. Having become unsurpassed, perfect, complete buddhas, tathāgatas place on their path of recollection the thought activities, movements, intentions, tendencies, afflictions, faculties and so on of all past, future, and present beings; all the methods to train beings; all the needs of beings; all the deeds of buddhas; what the doctrines intend; and all to be seen, but they do not direct their minds to them after the event. The recollection of a tathāgata has no deficiency.
 Tathāgatas are also “not deficient in meditative stabilization.” In a meditative equipoise on the suchness of all beings and all phenomena, all phenomena are placed in an equal state through the suchness that is a sameness. Hence, suchness is called “meditative stabilization.” That suchness, furthermore, is like space. In it there is no increase and there is no obscuration; it is as it is at all times, hence it is suchness. Hence their meditative stabilization has no deficiency. 
 They are also “not deficient in wisdom.” Thus, it says they have “the inexhaustible knowledge of the thought activities of all beings, the inexhaustible knowledge of the teaching of doctrine, the inexhaustible knowledge  for bringing beings to maturity, the inexhaustible knowledge of skill in the detailed and thorough knowledges” and so on. 
 They are also “not deficient in liberation.” As for “liberation,” śrāvaka liberation is intimately connected with words, pratyekabuddha liberation is intimately connected with conditions, and buddha liberation is intimately connected with the true nature of dharmas: these being liberation from the obscuration of affliction, liberation from obscuration to knowing, and, because it is the result, liberation through absorption, and liberation that is nonabiding nirvāṇa. All liberation is known to be inexhaustible and, serving like space, its work for the welfare of beings operates for as long as saṃsāra exists. Hence, they are “not deficient in liberation.”
 Just as they are not deficient in liberation, so too they are “not deficient in knowledge and seeing of liberation.” This is the twelfth attribute. 
“All physical actions are preceded by knowledge and informed by knowledge.”
Others—worthy ones—engage in unintended physical, verbal, and mental actions, confess faults, and also do not have certain experiences because of earlier habit formations. Buddhas do not act in that way. Buddhas, even just by looking, train beings. They train them by saying something, by not saying anything, by taking a rest, and even by sleeping, going, coming, sitting, or lying down; by radiating out light from their body; by their major marks and minor signs; by taking a step; and by opening their eyes. 
All the speech of the buddhas accomplishes all the needs of beings as well. It is not meaningless, comes in many forms, and is endowed with sixty qualities in harmony with the intentions and latent tendencies of all beings. 
All are
“mental actions”
unconnected with the residual impressions left by afflictions, with the residual impressions left by conceptualizations, and with the residual impressions left by thought constructions. They are intimately connected with great love and great compassion and operate without straying from the very limit of reality, marked by the ultimate.
 All three of these actions “are preceded by knowledge” because of the prior occurrence of knowledge; and all these three dharmas are “informed by knowledge” because of the force of knowledge that operates together with them. 
Tathāgatas
“see past time with knowledge free from attachment and free from obstruction.”
Worthy ones have knowledge of whatever they direct their energy toward, but their knowledge is attached to and obstructed by anything else. Tathāgatas are unlike them. Tathāgatas, in the manner of counting, know directly, and delineate and know exactly, as many buddhafields as there were in past times; as many tiny earth, water, fire, and wind particles as there were in those buddhafields; as many blades of grass, twigs on the trees, medicinal herbs, and forests as there were; as many families of beings as there were; the different statuses, colors, ages, shapes, facial expressions, mental activities, aspirations, faculties, and beliefs of those beings, as many as there were; as many buddhas as there were there, and as many doctrines as they taught; as many beings trained in the three vehicles as there were—as many śrāvakas as there were, as many pratyekabuddhas as there were, and as many bodhisattvas as there were; how long they were able to live, and their  meal times, clothing, and belongings, as many as there were; which eons those world systems burned up in, and how much destruction there was of them by water, fire, and wind; how much of the space element there was; as many configurations of the stars as there were, and as many mountains, ravines, waterfalls, lakes, and oceans as there were; as many villages, towns, cities, countries, kingdoms, and centers of empire as there were; as many divisions of markets as there were; as many fields, gardens, parks, and woods as there were; as many deaths, rebirths, and different forms of life of the beings as there were; the in and out breaths they took, as many as there were; the opening and shutting of the eyes of all beings there, as many as there were; and everything else like that as well, all of it, in one instant. The tathāgatas’ knowledge is similarly free from attachment and free from obstruction to everything in 
“the future,”
and similarly in 
“the present”
too. Those are 
“the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha.”
21. Great Vehicle of the dhāraṇī gateways
What are the dhāraṇī gateways? It is like this: there is the sameness of the way the letters work, the letters as gateways, and entrances through letters. 
 As for “dhāraṇī,” earlier in the explanation teaching the good qualities of bodhisattvas, the four—forbearance dhāraṇī, doctrine dhāraṇī, meaning dhāraṇī, and mantra dhāraṇī—are called dhāraṇī. The “gateways” of those dhāraṇīs are the letters. These four dhāraṇīs come about through the power of pondering those letters. 
 What is the way those letters work? “The way they work” is that through them the perfect meaning is thoroughly realized. The fact that the letters work in the same way is “the sameness of the way the letters work.”  Through all of the letters, a and so on, the nature of suchness that is “not produced” (anutpanna) and so on is thoroughly realized. This is “the sameness of the way the letters work.” Having taken those samenesses as the objective support, knowledge arises, hence it says “the sameness of the way the letters work.”
 Because the letters are the gateways to that, the letters are 
“letters as gateways.”
 Because they enter in through the letters there is
“entrance through letters,”
which is to say, that knowledge comes about through the force of the letters. 
“The letter a is the gateway to all dharmas because they are unproduced from the very beginning (ādy-anutpannatvād).”
The a is a gateway for gazing on all dharmas as they actually are because it causes engagement and is the cause. And why? Because they are unproduced from the beginning (ādi). Thus, from the beginning, during the period when all dharmas have stains, they are unproduced. So, when yogic practitioners, having projected the meaning unproduced onto the letter a, meditate on the meaning of being unproduced, then, through the force of habituation, just from having meditated on a so intensely they gain forbearance for all dharmas being “unproduced.” 
 Similarly, having projected the meaning
“without dirt (rajas)”
onto 
“ra,”
just from having meditated on ra so intensely they gain forbearance for all dharmas being “without dirt.” 
 From that they become forbearance dhāraṇīs.
 Thus, earlier in the explanation of the teaching in the Introduction chapter the way they are explained is that they are doctrine dhāraṇīs when they have become causes for perfectly bearing in mind, extremely swiftly, the collections of the expositions of doctrine in great detail by buddhas and bodhisattva great beings in the ten directions; they are meaning dhāraṇīs when they have become causes for perfectly bearing in mind the meanings of those doctrines; and they are secret mantra dhāraṇīs as bases (ādhārāṇi) of the secret mantras that stop the plagues and problems of all beings. 
 All of them, furthermore, arise with letters as their cause, so letters are “dhāraṇī gateways” because they are the gateways into the dhāraṇīs. The knowledge that comes about from taking those as a basis  is also called a “dhāraṇī gateway.”
“Unproduced,”
and so on, are attributes of suchness, because it is like space, because just as space is “unproduced,” suchness is similarly unproduced; and because just as space is “without dirt,” suchness is similarly without dirt.
“Because they are ultimately without distinctions”—
they are one because ultimately they are not different.
“Because of the way death and rebirth are unfindable” 
means because suchness is a state where a birth state and death state are unfindable.
“Because of the way names are unfindable”—
because in suchness, as names, they are inexpressible.
“They transcend the ordinary world”
because suchness transcends the world. 
“Because the vine of existence and the causes and conditions have been destroyed”— 
because suchness in its nature destroys the causes and conditions of the vine of existence.
“Because tamed and staying tamed have a certain limit”—
because the afflictions that are tamed, and the actions that have staying tamed as their intrinsic nature, do not exist in suchness, “tamed and staying tamed have a certain limit.” 
“Because they are free from bonds”— 
because they are free from all three “bonds”: greed, hatred, and confusion.
“Because disorder has gone”—
because any “disorder” or distraction that has come about through the force of afflictions, karma, and maturation has gone.
“Because attachment is unfindable”—
because the attachment that is an afflicted obscuration, the attachment that is a karmic obscuration, and the attachment that is a maturation obscuration are unfindable. 
“Because the sound of speech paths has been cut”—
because language that is in its nature the convention of speech has been cut.
“Because they do not wander  from suchness”—
because they do not wander away from their own intrinsic nature, suchness.
“Because in fact they are not produced”—
because it is logical they are not produced. 
“Because they have nothing to be pretentious about”— 
because the pretentiousness that is a secondary afflictive emotion, or that comes about from the affliction of conceptualization, does not exist.
“Because an agent is unfindable”— 
because “an agent”—a person or Īśvara and so on that are a dissimilar cause—or things that are causes and conditions, are unfindable.
“They do not pass beyond sameness”
means all phenomena do not pass beyond being the same.
“Because taking something as ‘mine’ is unfindable”—
because taking something as ‘mine’ because of craving does not exist.
“Because going is unfindable”—
because going to another birth based on a good form of life or a bad form of life does not exist.
“Because a standing place is unfindable”—
because the defining mark of a standing place does not exist. 
“Because birth is unfindable”— 
because a birth marked as having arisen from nonexistence does not exist. 
“Because breath is unfindable”—
because it is feeble because it is weak.
“Because a dharma is unfindable”—
because it does not exist as the mental image of a dharma.
“Because a state the same as the sky is unfindable”— 
because all dharmas cannot be apprehended because they are the same as the sky. 
“Because extinction is unfindable”— 
because an extinction marked by not being permanent is unfindable. 
“Because knowledge is unfindable”— 
because in the absence of a real basis to be known its defining mark does not exist.
“Because a cause is unfindable”—
because the mark of a cause does not exist. 
Because destruction is unfindable”—
because destruction, the defining mark of disintegration, is unfindable.
“Because a beautiful skin color is unfindable”—
because suchness has no color and does not radiate because it has no light. 
“Because mindfulness is unfindable”—
because it is not within the range of knowledge that is mindful of suchness.
“Because calling out is unfindable”— 
because it is not within the range of names.
“Because eagerness is unfindable”— 
because all phenomena are inactive.
“Because density in dharmas is unfindable”—
because the idea of density is in error. 
“Because establishment is unfindable”—
because an “establishment” would be an array of the compounded and that does not exist. 
“Because conflict is unfindable”— 
because it is separated from the conflict of afflictive emotion and from the conflict of conceptualization.
“Because a result is unfindable”— 
because the mental image of a result is unfindable in all the phenomena that are the results. 
“Because aggregates are unfindable”—
because there are no masses of afflictions, karma, and maturation.
“Because old age is unfindable”—
because an old age marked by change from one state to another does not exist. 
“Because conduct is unfindable”— 
because the conduct of going and coming is unfindable. 
“Because harm is unfindable”— 
because violence does not exist. 
“Because grasping at something as ‘I’ is unfindable”—
because grasping at something as ‘I’ constitutes a view and that constitutes conceit, which does not exist. 
“By which anything might be conventionally designated, or by which anything might be expressed, expounded”—
a speaker’s duty—or
“by which anything might be… realized, or seen—
a listener’s duty. 
“By which anything might be conventionally designated.” These are the noble and ignoble utterances based on sixteen conventional designations governed by having seen, heard, thought, and known, and also governed by not having seen, heard, thought, or known. “By which anything might be expressed”: utterances based on a pot, a cloth, a bull, a horse and so on. “By which anything might be expounded”: utterances governed by the indication of qualifying attributes—long, short, light, dark, blue, yellow and so on. 
Based on a listener also deducing the meaning, utterances “by which anything might be realized” are based on deducing, which cause it to be subsequently realized. Utterances “by which anything might be seen” are based on them seeing the meaning with direct perception.
“Will not become perplexed whatever the sound”—
they will seek for the ultimate in all statements. 
“Will succeed though the sameness of dharmas”—
they will make a connection between all sounds and suchness. 
“Skill in understanding sounds”
is understanding the languages and thoughts of all beings. 
“Mindfulness”
is not forgetting.
“Intelligence”
is wisdom that follows the ultimate constituted by the intellect, mental fortitude, and a quick grasp of a lot, based on which you say someone is “quick-witted.” 
“Awareness”
ranges over the conventional. The meaning of the rest is obvious. 
7. How have they come to set out in the Great Vehicle?
This has been the exposition of the Great Vehicle. Having thus completed the exposition of the Great Vehicle, now, setting the scene for the second of the questions with,
“Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘How have bodhisattva great beings come to set out in the Great Vehicle?’ ”
it says those who have set out on the following ten levels “come to set out in the Great Vehicle.” With this the Lord teaches that they have set out in the Great Vehicle and poses a question about the ten bodhisattva levels and what has to be done for the purifications. 
“By all dharmas not changing place”— 
this teaches that suchness is like space and does not change places, and hence the knowledge that does not go on to some other place  is the cause of passing on to another level. 
“But even though they do not falsely project the level of those dharmas… they still do the purification for a level”
teaches the cause of the moving up to the next level. It means that because changing places does not exist, going does not exist, and coming and so on does not exist, they do not falsely project the level of those dharmas, but it is not that they do not do the work, so it is teaching the activity of the perfection of skillful means of bodhisattvas. As for the skill in means, even though the ultimate and the conventional modes seem to absolutely contradict each other, bodhisattvas achieve everything necessary without a contradiction.
 First it gives an introductory explanation of those level purifications, and then in a later explanatory section it says,
“Lord, what is done in purification of the surpassing aspiration of bodhisattva great beings occupying the first level?”
and so on. 
“For the sake of all beings they engage in the quest for knowledge of the Great Vehicle.”
“Knowledge of the Great Vehicle” is the knowledge of a knower of all aspects. The “quest for” is making a prayer that is a vow for that, and producing the thought of it. Thus, it is seeking the level of a buddha for the sake of all beings. This is 
“the purification of the basis for the benefit”
of all beings. 
 Among these, first, those who want to carry out purification must purify the 
“aspiration.”
Then there is the accomplishment. Because it has the benefit of all beings as its root, they must produce the thought to be
“beneficial.”
Because that comes from thinking equally about all beings they must produce 
“the same state of mind.”
The first level is of the perfection of giving, so they must purify 
“giving up things.”
As a preliminary to reaching the pure levels,
“spiritual friends”
are an absolute necessity,  so they must
“serve”
them. Then they have to hear the true doctrine from spiritual friends, so they must 
“seek the doctrine.” 
Because their mindstreams have not yet reached maturity they must remain in 
“renunciation.”
They must constantly and always 
“long for the body of a buddha”
and for buddhahood. As much as they are able, they have to bring beings to maturity without becoming discouraged when persevering, so they must give 
“an exposition of dharmas.”
And, starting from the first prayer that is a vow, they should have respect for 
“truth statements.”
These are linked up with 
“the ten purifications.”
 On
“the second level,”
the level of the perfection of morality, they 
“pay attention to… morality,”
and pay attention to
“a feeling of appreciation and gratitude”
in order to increase love for all beings. They pay attention to 
“patience”
in order not to look at the shortcomings of beings; pay attention to 
“great delight”
in order to transform the mindstreams of beings into suitable vessels; pay attention to 
“not ignoring any being”
because they are the root of all undertakings; pay attention to 
“compassion”
in order to stop the idea of personal suffering; pay attention motivated by
“faith in gurus”
in order to generate 
“reverence,”
and pay attention to 
“the perfections”
because they are the equipment for awakening. These are
“the eight attentions.”
Connect it like this with them all.
“In raising up and transforming wholesome roots for the purification of a buddhafield”
they dedicate them, having planted roots for the purification of a buddhafield, thinking, “May these wholesome roots purify a buddhafield.” There is no “buddhafield” at all that is a real thing. It simply appears in this or that way to themselves and others. That locution is used just for the purification of beings. 
“Not giving up dwelling in the forest”— 
the locution “dwelling in the forest” here should not be taken to mean living in the woods. Here “dwelling in the forest” is dwelling with thoughts that are unmixed and abiding in isolation. The bodhisattvas’ thoughts become mixed through the force of attention to śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha thoughts. As it will say later,
“Subhūti … these bodhisattva great beings who are dwelling isolated from attention connected with śrāvakas … and pratyekabuddhas … Subhūti, I have endorsed that as the bodhisattva great beings’ isolation … If bodhisattva great beings live day and night in this isolation they truly live in isolation.”
And also, 
“If they live in jungle, upland forest, and frontier retreats, they live…”
Similarly, with the locution
“the qualities of the ascetic”—
you should take those as qualities that become causes for purifying conceptualization, not as being a refuse-rag wearer and so on. Take
“where all training is without movement”
as the practice of the perfection of wisdom free from conceptualization. 
“Not causing all the dharmas to come into being”— 
all the dharmas have forsaken movement.
“Their minds not connecting with the foundations of consciousnesses”
means they are not adulterated and do not give rise to latent tendencies. 
“By resorting to a view of the Buddha they do not see the Buddha.”
With a view that apprehends something as the Buddha they think, “I have seen the Buddha,” persisting with a “view of the Buddha,” so “they do not see the Buddha.” This means the Buddha is seen with knowledge that does not apprehend anything. It is similar with Dharma and Saṅgha as well. 
“ ‘All dharmas are empty,’ because they are empty of their own particular characteristics, not empty of emptiness.” 
“All dharmas”—form and so on—do not exist as the particular characteristic of falsely imagined form and so on. Still, they are not nonexistent as the particular inexpressible characteristic that is the intrinsic nature of the ultimate, emptiness. This means they do not have to have the fear that comes about caused by the view that in emptiness everything is annihilated. 
“Because the empty is an emptiness of its own particular characteristic, therefore emptiness does not oppose emptiness”—
this means were emptiness not to be empty of emptiness’s own particular characteristic, there would be something that is not empty, and “all dharmas are empty” and this particular characteristic of emptiness would be in opposition and there would then be an emptiness in opposition. Thus, even emptiness has not become some other dharma, “emptiness,” so it is asserted to be empty of emptiness’s own particular characteristic. Hence it is established that “all dharmas are empty” so “emptiness does not oppose emptiness.” 
“Because the empty is the emptiness of emptiness and they do not cause emptiness to be realized in emptiness”—
there is not a second emptiness in emptiness. Therefore, because there is no second emptiness, they do not cause emptiness to be realized in emptiness. Just that knowledge is the realization of emptiness.
“Purification of the three spheres”
is the purification of the three spheres of actions of body, speech, and thinking mind.
“Because of the purity of the field of beings”—
the field of beings is purified because all beings are just tathāgata­garbha. 
“Not adding to and not taking away”—
not overly negating what exists is “not taking away”; not overly reifying what does not exist is “not adding to.” This means they see
“sameness” 
by not overly negating what really exists, and not overly reifying what really does not exist. 
“The absence of a realization of all dharmas”—
they do not see the two—a realized or a realizer—so the
“realization of the way things are perfect… is the absence of a realization.”
“The absence of habitual ideas about dual phenomena is the exposition of the one way things are.”
To illustrate, just as space is a single entity undivided into different entities, similarly with suchness. Because it is always in the same form, there is “the exposition of the one way things are,” because “of the absence of habitual ideas about dual phenomena” existing and not existing, being a phenomenon and not a phenomenon, being permanent and impermanent, and so on. 
“The views of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas”—
these should taken as any of those conceptualizations where śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha views have not been abandoned.
“All six faculties do not radiate out.”
They are not scattered; they are collected together. 
“What is not a level of attachment on account of unobstructed knowledge?”
This means: What is the knowledge that is free from attachment and anger?
“It is attending on the Dharma”—
this is because it is said, “Whoever sees the Dharma sees the Buddha.”
“Purifying the”
field of my and others’
“minds”—
this is because there is no 
“buddhafield”
except the field of the mind, because it is simply just a representation. 
“Matured meditative stabilization”—
at the eighth level there is no effort, so, ultimately, all the levels in which there is an effort at practice are completed, which is to say, wholesome dharmas abide in their matured form. Hence the meditative stabilizations that are the maturations of earlier absorptions in meditative stabilization are spontaneously drawn into the bodhisattvas, so it says
“absorbed in meditation.”
“A river of confidence”
means a continuum of confidence, a demeanor, a confidence that arises continually. 
“Taking birth miraculously”—
from the eighth level they do not gestate in a womb. They make such a demonstration only for the sake of bringing beings to maturity. 
“Śuklavipaśyanā level”
is the devoted course of conduct level;
“Gotra level”
is the great forbearance level;
“Aṣṭamaka level”
is the level of a candidate for the result of stream enterer, because it is the eighth counting down from recipient of the result of worthy one;
“Darśana level”
is the level of recipient of the result of stream enterer;
“Tanū level”
is the level of a once-returner, because with the exception of the remaining attachments that have been severely depleted, attachments and so on to sense objects have ended; and
“Vītarāga level”
is the level of a non-returner, because the desire to experience sense objects, and malice, have been perfectly cut, so it is free from attachment and so on to sense objects. The
“Kṛtāvin level”
is the level of a worthy one. The comprehension that “the work to be done is done” is “knowledge that it is done.” Because of having that, the “one with knowledge that it is done” is the worthy one. Alternatively, Kṛtāvins have as their nature a comprehension of what has been done, and their level is the Kṛtāvin level.
8. From where will the Great Vehicle go forth?
Having thus taught who has set out in the Great Vehicle, then, taking the third question—“From where will that vehicle go forth?”—as its point of departure, it says
“it will go forth from the three realms and will stand wherever there is knowledge of all aspects.”
Because the Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha Vehicles also “go forth from the three realms,” to make it clear it says “it will go forth from the three realms and will stand in the knowledge of all aspects.” Thus, it teaches two functions of the Great Vehicle, because it says about the Great Vehicle that “it will stand in  the knowledge of all aspects.” 
“Furthermore, by way of nonduality”—
this is teaching that a different result does not exist, to those who come at it incorrectly, thinking “there are two, so they are different.” In the Great Vehicle, during the result period there is simply a state of awakening, so there is no difference between the Great Vehicle and the knowledge of all aspects. 
 They are therefore a “nonduality,” and hence it says that these two dharmas 
“are not conjoined and not disjoined,”
and so on. It is teaching that they are not marked as being the same or different. In regard to their being “not conjoined and not disjoined,” they are “not conjoined” because they are not one; they are “not disjoined” because they are not different. They are
“formless”
because they do not cause anything to become firmly planted. They
“cannot be pointed out,”
because they cannot be shown. These two teach that there is no grasper or grasped. There is no grasper because there is nothing causing anything to become firmly planted. There is no grasped because they cannot be shown. They
“do not obstruct”—
this is teaching that there is no object or object-possessor because they are not marked by obstructing, as are a faculty and an object. Because they do not have marks and hence have “no mark,” and because both, without marks, have a single mark, it says they
“have only one mark—that is, no mark.”
“Because, Subhūti, a dharma without a mark is not going forth, nor will it go forth, nor has it gone forth.”
Because thoroughly established dharmas are free from all falsely imagined marks, they are in their nature purified. They have, therefore, in their nature already gone forth, so they do not, plucked out of thin air, go forth. 
“Subhūti, someone who would assert that dharmas without marks go forth might as well assert of suchness that it goes forth,”
and so on, teaches in detail  that they do not, plucked out of thin air, go forth. 
 Suchness in its very nature is not stained by anything, and like space does not go forth. Therefore it says,
“Subhūti, the intrinsic nature of suchness does not go forth from the three realms.”
“Suchness is empty of the intrinsic nature of suchness.”
The falsely imagined “intrinsic nature of suchness” does not exist at all in “suchness,” so because of what will it go forth from there?
 I have already explained “suchness” and so on, ending with 
“the inconceivable element,”
earlier.
“The abandonment element, the detachment element, and the cessation element”—
that “suchness” is itself called the abandonment element because it causes the abandonment of all thought constructions that are afflicted obscurations and obscurations to knowledge; it is called the detachment element because it causes separation from attachment to the three states of being and is beyond all worlds; and it is called the cessation element because it causes the cessation of all suffering. 
 The five words—
“name… causal sign… conventional term… communication… or a designation”—
incorporate the falsely imagined. To illustrate, “cow” said of the materiality of a cow is a name; its dewlap, hump, and so on are its causal sign; “the one that has the red calf,” “the one that has the white calf” are conventional terms; “bring the cow here and milk it!” is a communication; and all expressions are designations.
 The five words—
“nonproduction… nonstopping… nondefilement… nonpurification… and not occasioning anything”—
incorporate the thoroughly established. It is nonproduction because it does not arise; it is nonstopping because it does not stop; it is nondefilement because it is not stained;  it is nonpurification because it is naturally pure; and it is not occasioning anything because the occasioning of anything that causes purification does not exist.
9. Where will that Great Vehicle stand?
Now, taking the fourth question—“Where will that vehicle stand?”—as its point of departure, it says
“that vehicle will not stand anywhere.”
Just as space does not stand anywhere, similarly the Great Vehicle, reaching the end in the form of the dharma body, does not stand anywhere either. This is teaching not just that the Great Vehicle does not stand, but that all falsely imagined and thoroughly established dharmas do not stand anywhere either. 
“Because no dharma stands”— 
a falsely imagined phenomenon does not exist, so it does not stand anywhere. As for the thoroughly established phenomenon, it does not stand anywhere because a basis and that which is based on that do not exist. 
“And yet, Subhūti, that vehicle will stand by way of not standing”
teaches that just “not standing” is conventionally labeled its “stand.” Therefore, it says
“suchness does not stand or not stand.”
It “does not stand” because ultimately it does not have the mark of that which is based on something; and it “does not not stand” either, because conventionally it stands marked by not standing. 
 Similarly, connect the marks of standing and not standing with them all.
“That vehicle, standing by way of not standing and by way of not moving, will not stand anywhere.”
It does not stand anywhere as a real basis so it says “not standing”; and it stands with the mark of not standing, is that which is based on something, and is without error, so it says “standing.” 
10. Who will go forth in this vehicle?
The fifth question is,
“Who will go forth in”
that? That vehicle is
“the Great Vehicle.”
“One who  goes forth”
is the person; 
“by which one goes forth”
is the path dharmas “by which”—the cause on account of which—one goes forth; and
“from where one goes forth”
is from suffering existence.
“You cannot apprehend a self because it is extremely pure”
teaches that if they grasp a “self” and so on, and form and so on, it spoils the thoroughly established phenomenon that is absolutely pure. 
“Lord, what do you not apprehend such that all these dharmas are not apprehended?”
This is a question about the reason why all that has been said before cannot be apprehended. It has three connected sections. The first connected section,
“not apprehending suchness”
and so on, is the reason those dharmas cannot be apprehended. 
 Then the second connected section is the qualm,
“And why”
is suchness and so on not apprehended? And where it says 
“because of not apprehending”
the defining mark of those, of 
“suchness”
and so on, they are
“not apprehended.”
 Then in the third connected section all the emptinesses, and the dharmas—the levels and so on—are
“not apprehended.”
 Refer
“the Śuklavipaśyanā level”
only to the period of special insight on the devoted course of conduct level. 
“Gotra level”
indicates all the periods of the wholesome roots that are aids to knowledge that penetrates reality. 
11. It surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth. Is that why it is called a great vehicle?
You may think: the Great Vehicle, where it says,
“Lord, you say this—‘Great Vehicle,’ ”
has already been explained before, so what is the context here? In response, we say that is true, but earlier the explanation of the words was in the context of those who “have set out in the Great Vehicle,” teaching that the practice dharmas in the context of setting out, from the perfections and so on up to the dhāraṇī doors, are the Great Vehicle.  Now, where it says “from where that vehicle goes forth” and so on, in the part of the text about going forth, it is giving an exposition of the resultant Great Vehicle as the state of a buddha. So now, for this resultant Great Vehicle, an exposition has to be given of the creative explanation of Great Vehicle and of the Great Vehicle dharmas. That is the context.
“It surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth; that is why it is called a great vehicle.”
Here a going is called a vehicle. The great going forth is the Great Vehicle. Because it surpasses the three worlds and is a definite emergence from them all, that going forth is bigger, hence it is called a great vehicle.
12. That vehicle is equal to space
“That Great Vehicle is equal to space”
establishes the greatness of true reality. Because of a threefold reason it is taught to be equal to space:
it has a great amount of room;its production, stopping, and so on do not exist; and it is not included in the three times.
“To illustrate, just as space”
definitely, in a single instant,
“has room”—
places for all kinds of behavior all 
“beings”
want to engage in—similarly, in this 
“Great Vehicle,”
in a single instant all beings come together at the same time, without any problem at all, even though they are established in the places for all-knowledge, for the knowledge of path aspects, and for the knowledge of all aspects. 
“To illustrate,”
it is not suitable to say of 
“space”
at the time that it was 
“coming,”
“originated,” or was
“going,”
“stopped,” or was
“remaining,”
based on “remaining for a moment”—so too for 
“the Great Vehicle.”
“To illustrate,”
you cannot say ‘space happened at that earlier time, will happen at that future time, or exists in the time in between’—so too for 
“the Great Vehicle.”
They are taught in that sequence in three connected sections.
 Then the Lord, having delighted in that section spoken by the elder, explains, in the order of the prior passage, that the six perfections and so on included in the dharma body constituted out of the maturation dharmas are the Great Vehicle. Having thus taught the Great Vehicle as the six perfections and so on, then, in reference to the five statements of the elder, that 
“it surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth; … that vehicle is equal to space… to illustrate, Lord, just as space has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure, … you cannot apprehend coming or going… [and] you cannot apprehend a prior limit or a later limit,”
the Lord says what he said, with
“Furthermore, Subhūti, where you have said, ‘This vehicle surpasses the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and goes forth,’ ”
and so on, and gives a detailed exposition of each.
 What does it teach, where it says
“Subhūti, if the desire realm were to be factual, unmistaken,”
and so on? It is teaching that if all dharmas—the form realm and so on—are taken to be not falsely imagined and not unreal, were they taken to be thoroughly established, truly real entities, then this Great Vehicle would not go forth from them, and would not abandon them. But all those dharmas are falsely imagined, are unreal, and thus this Great Vehicle does abandon them. 
 Construe 
“Subhūti, if the desire realm were to be factual, unmistaken, unaltered,  not an error, reality, the real,”
and so on—with: if the desire realm
“were to be existent, not nonexistent.”
If the desire realm “were to be,” that is to say, were it “not nonexistent,” it would exist with the threefold mark of a thoroughly established phenomenon, a true phenomenon, and an uncompounded phenomenon. There, the three terms, “factual, unmistaken, and unaltered,” teach the mark of the thoroughly established; the five terms, “not an error, reality, the real,” and 
“true, as things are,”
teach a true phenomenon; and the four terms,
“permanent, stable, eternal, qualified by not changing,”
teach the mark of the uncompounded. 
 There, the mark of the thoroughly established is threefold: the thoroughly established that is indestructible, the thoroughly established without error, and the thoroughly established that does not alter. “Factual” teaches the thoroughly established that is indestructible, “unmistaken” teaches the thoroughly established without error, and “unaltered” teaches the thoroughly established that does not alter.
 The mark of a true phenomenon is also fivefold. The not-an-error mark is, for example, like the nonexistence of being in error about water in a mirage. “Not an error” teaches that. The mark of an intrinsic nature is, for example, like the real thing that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in a magically produced illusion. “Reality” teaches that. The mark of existence is, for example, like the nonexistence of being marked as not existing in matted falling hairs, and so on. “The real” teaches that. The mark of the nondeceptive is, for example, like the nonexistence of the deceiving mark in the form of two moons and so on. “True” teaches that. The mark of being correct is, for example, like  the nonexistence of “permanent,” “happy,” “self” and so on being separated from being feasible. “As things are” teaches that. 
 The mark of the uncompounded is fourfold. About the mark of not being produced and not stopping it says “permanent”; about the mark of remaining constantly it says “stable”; about the mark of not being annihilated it says “eternal”; and about the mark of not changing it says “qualified by not changing.” 
 In 
“Subhūti, it is because the desire realm is all a construction, a creation, a narrative,”
“a construction” teaches that it is not falsely imagined because constructed means not true; “a creation” teaches that because it is dependently established it is just the falsely imagined unreal; and “a narrative” teaches that because it is conventional it is just something to be said. 
“Not existent, and nonexistent”
means it is nonexistent, it does not exist; 
“the world with its gods, humans, and asuras”
is the three worlds. The locution “asuras” indicates the world below, “humans” indicates the world in between, and “gods” indicates the world above. 
 In this connected section, furthermore, it teaches the three realms, the aggregates, the sense fields, the six collections of consciousnesses, the six collections of contacts, the six collections of feelings, the six elements, and the twelve links of dependent origination; suchness, unmistaken suchness, and unaltered suchness; the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element; the six  perfections, all the emptinesses, the side of awakening and so on ending with the buddhadharmas; the dharmas of the Gotra level and so on ending with the dharmas of the Buddha level; the Gotra level itself and so on ending with the Buddha level; all the productions of the thought; and the vajra-like knowledge, a great person’s major marks, light, the voice with sixty special qualities, the wheel of the Dharma, and beings. 
 There, it is the
“voice with sixty special qualities”
because, as Secrets of the Tathāgatas Sūtra says, it is
 moist, pleasant, charming, captivating, pure, immaculate, clearly illuminating, modulated, worth listening to, impervious, low and sweet in tone, subdued, not harsh, not violent, tamed, pleasing to the ear, physically refreshing, mentally exciting, satisfying to the heart, a producer of joy and happiness, without an edge, worth fully understanding, worth reflecting on, clear, worth loving, worth delighting in, worth making fully known, worth causing reflection, logical, relevant, without repetition, a lion’s roar, an elephant’s bellow, a peal of thunder, a dragon lord’s speech, the music of the celestials, the sound of the cry of the cuckoo, the sound of the voice of Brahmā, the sound of the cry of the jīvaṃjīvaka, the mellifluous voice of the lord of gods, the beat of a drum, not overblown, not understated, with every word syntactically correct,  free of wrong usage, not wanting, not base, not miserable, joyful, comprehensive, comprehension, fluent, playful, and it completes all sounds, satisfies all senses, is blameless, does not waver, is not too quick, carries over the entire assembly, and is completely endowed with excellence. 
 It is 
(1) “moist” because it firms up the wholesome roots of the mass of beings; (2) “pleasant” because it is a joy to contact in the here and now; (3) “charming” because it is about goodness; (4) “captivating” because of clear articulation; (5) “pure” because it is the unsurpassed, extraordinary subsequent attainment; (6) “immaculate” because it is free from all afflictions, bad proclivities, and residual impressions; (7) “clearly illuminating” because the words and syllables are heard; (8) “modulated” (valgu) because it has the quality of strength (balaguṇa) to overcome all ill-thought-out tīrthika prejudice; (9) “worth listening to” because it comes forth from practice; (10) “impervious” because it is not stymied by anybody else’s arguments; (11) “low and sweet in tone” because it is stimulating; (12) “subdued” because it counteracts attachment; (13) “not harsh” because it gently imparts training; (14) “not violent” because it teaches transcending that is perfect renunciation; (15) “tamed” because it teaches the discipline of the three vehicles; (16) “pleasing to the ear” because it counteracts distraction; (17) “physically refreshing” because it makes you collect your thoughts; (18) “mentally exciting” because it carries with it the joyfulness of special insight; (19) “satisfying to the heart” because it gets rid of doubt; (20) “a producer of joy and happiness” because it removes mistakes and uncertainty;  (21) “without an edge” because it does not make you feel sorry when you practice; (22) “worth fully understanding” because it is a basis for perfect knowledge arisen from listening; (23) “worth reflecting on” because it is a basis for perfect knowledge arisen from thinking; (24) “clear” because it is not a Dharma set forth by a tight-fisted teacher; (25) “worth loving” because it makes those who have reached their own goal love it; (26) “worth delighting in” because it makes those who have not reached their own goal delight in it; (27) “worth making fully known” because it makes the inconceivable dharmas perfectly visible; (28) “worth causing reflection” because it perfectly teaches the inconceivable dharmas; (29) “logical” because it does not contradict valid cognition; (30) “relevant” because it teaches trainees what they seek; (31) “without repetition” because it is not to no avail; (32) “a lion’s roar” because of frightening all the tīrthika communities; (33) “an elephant’s trumpeting” because it is a clear and high sound; (34) “a peal of thunder” because it is deep; (35) “a dragon lord’s speech” because it is worth keeping; (36) “the music of the celestials” because it is sweet; (37) “the sound of the cry of the cuckoo” because it naturally happens quickly; (38) “the sound of the voice of Brahmā” because it carries far; (39) “the sound of the cry of the jīvaṃjīvaka” because it is an auspicious omen preceding all spiritual achievement; (40) “the mellifluous voice of the lord of gods” because it is not something you transgress; (41) “the beat of a drum” because it precedes victory over all Māras and opponents; (42) “not overblown” because it is not praise that spoils; (43) “not understated” because it is not censure that spoils; (44) “with every word syntactically correct” because it follows in every respect the rules  in all the grammars; (45) “free of wrong usage” because a lack of mindfulness does not occasion it; (46) “not wanting” because at all times it serves the needs of disciples; (47) “not base” because it is not contingent on gifts and services; (48) “not miserable” because it is fearless; (49) “joyful” because happiness has come from it; (50) “comprehensive” because expertise in all areas of knowledge comes from it; (51) “comprehension” because it accomplishes all the needs of living beings; (52) “fluent” because it is without hiatuses; (53) “playful” because it comes in various figurations; (54) and it “completes all sounds” because one sound serves to represent different words in different languages; (55) “satisfies all senses” because one object serves to represent different objects; (56) “is blameless” because it is done in accord with the commitment; (57) “does not waver” because it is connected with future time; (58) is “not too quick” because it is unrushed; (59) “carries over the entire assembly” because those far and near in the assembly can hear it equally; and (60) is “completely endowed with excellence” because it is the thorough establishment of all ordinary meaning and example dharmas.
This is the Master’s instruction.
 Now, with,
“Subhūti, you said, ‘The Great Vehicle is equal to space,’ ”
and so on, it gives an explanation taking his second statement as its point of departure. It should be known as making a presentation of falsely imagined things with twenty-one aspects, and because those that are presented do not exist in this Great Vehicle, it is like space. The twenty-one forms presented are (1) direction; (2) shape; (3) color; (4) time; (5) decrease and increase and so on; (6) defilement and purification; (7) produced and stopping,  (8) wholesome and so on; (9) seen, heard and so on; (10) something that should be understood and so on; (11) a maturation and subject to maturation; (12) greedy and so on; (13) the constituent, the ten bodhisattva levels, Pramuditā and so on; (14) the ten levels, Śuklavipaśyanā… Gotra and so on; (15) the levels of noble beings; (16) the twos; (17) the Summary of the Doctrine; (18) the doors to liberation; (19) the found and so on; (20) secret and not secret and so on; (21) and discourse and so on.
 Among these, 
“decrease [and] increase”
are gradual;
“reduced”
is severed;
“produced,”
the arising of things at the beginning; 
“stopping,” 
perishing in a single instant;
“lasting,”
phenomena thus produced and stopping not being interrupted; 
“nonlasting,”
interrupted and invisible; and
“last and then change into something else,”
a continuum with earlier and later specific parts that are dissimilar. 
“[It is] not something that should be understood”—
because it is not a thing like form and so on that consciousness can penetrate. Consciousness cannot penetrate falsely imagined dharmas because in that state they are nonexistent. 
“[It is] not something that should not be understood,”
because it is not totally nonexistent like a rabbit’s horns, and
“not something that should be thoroughly understood,”
and so on, because it is not realized as the truth. 
“A maturation”
is that which is a result;
“subject to maturation”
is something that will mature.
“[It is] not found,”
because it is something that is not gained; 
“not apprehended,”
because it is not an object within the range of the faculties; 
“not discourse,”
because you cannot convey it in words;  and
“not not discourse,”
because conventionally you can indicate it with words. Put them together like that. 
 After that there is an explanation of the three statements, with,
“Subhūti, where you said, ‘To illustrate, Lord, just as space has room for infinite, countless beings beyond measure,’ ”
and so on. 
“You should know, Subhūti, that because a being is not existent, space is not existent, and you should know that because space is not existent the Great Vehicle is not existent.”
What is the meaning of this? You should know that you enter into the selflessness of dharmas through the selflessness of persons, so, having earlier been engaged with “beings are nonexistent,” you become engaged with “space is nonexistent.” You become engaged with “the Great Vehicle is nonexistent” through “space is nonexistent.” Because they are nonexistent, the dharmas “infinite” and so on are nonexistent too, and similarly with all dharmas.
“Suchness is nonexistent because beings are nonexistent.”
It should be understood that because “beings are nonexistent,” the falsely imagined suchness of form and suchness of sound and so on are nonexistent. Thus, the intention is this: because
“all dharmas are nonexistent,”
therefore it is 
“like space,”
and therefore it 
“has room.”
Because it is “nonexistent,” it is
“infinite” 
and so on.
 In this subsection of the text, the first subsection of that is
“because a being is not existent, space is not existent… because space is not existent the Great Vehicle is not existent.”
The second has those same three connected with 
“infinite,”
the third connected with 
“countless,” 
and the fourth connected with 
“beyond measure.”
The fifth has them connected with
“the dharma-constituent,”
and the sixth connected with
“suchness.”
In the seventh, having added on the thirteen—
“self, a living being,”
and so on—they are connected with the last one,
“the very limit of reality.”
The eighth has just those connected with 
“the inconceivable element,”
serving for the very limit of reality. 
The ninth has just those connected with dharmas—the 
“form”
aggregate and so on; the tenth has just those connected with the six inner sense fields; the eleventh connected with the six outer ones; the twelfth connected with the six 
“consciousnesses”; 
the thirteenth connected with the six
“contacts”; 
the fourteenth connected with the six collections of
“feelings”;
the fifteenth connected with the six
“elements”;
the sixteenth connected with 
“dependent origination”;
the seventeenth connected with the six
“perfections”;
the eighteenth connected with all
“the emptinesses”;
the nineteenth connected with the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening; the twentieth connected with
“the noble truths,”
up to
“the dhāraṇī doors”;
the twenty-first connected with
“the ten powers,”
up to
“the distinct attributes of a buddha”;
the twenty-second connected with 
“the Gotra level,”
up to
“the Kṛtāvin level”;
the twenty-third connected with persons, from
“stream enterer” 
up to
“worthy one”;
the twenty-fourth connected with 
“pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas”;
the twenty-fifth connected with the three
“vehicles”;
and the twenty-sixth subsection of the passage teaching with an analogy connected with 
“nirvāṇa.”
These are the twenty-six subsections of the passage.
“In this vehicle you cannot apprehend ‘coming or going,’ and there is not even ‘remaining,’
and so on, teaches the fourth statement.
“Subhūti, all dharmas are unmoving. They do not go anywhere, they do not come from anywhere, and they do not remain anywhere,”
because in the context of the final vehicle they are simply just suchness. They appear unmoving because they do not arise, stop, or remain. 
“Basic nature… suchness… intrinsic nature”—
take that dharma-constituent itself, in the context of the final Great Vehicle level, as just “basic nature,  suchness, intrinsic nature,” and 
“mark,”
because just that is the basic nature, not something else; just that is suchness, not something else; just that is intrinsic nature, not something else; and just that is the mark, not something else. It is simply just described differently from it. 
 There, the “unmoving” subsection is the first. Then you should connect those with the aggregates, sense fields, consciousnesses, contacts, feelings, six elements, links of dependent origination, perfections, and emptinesses; the applications of mindfulness up to the distinct attributes of a buddha; and suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness, the true nature of dharmas, the dharma-constituent, the establishment of dharmas, the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, the inconceivable element, awakening, buddha, the compounded, and the uncompounded.
 After that, in the statement,
“You cannot apprehend that vehicle’s prior limit, cannot apprehend its later limit, and cannot apprehend its middle either. This is a vehicle equally of the three time periods. That is why ‘Great Vehicle’ is said,”
speaking about “time,” “three,” “equal,” and “vehicle” separately, it eliminates “time” with
“the past time period is empty of the past time period,”
and so on. It eliminates “equal” with
“the equality of the three time periods is also empty of the equality of the three time periods.”
It eliminates “vehicle” with
“the Great Vehicle is also empty of the Great Vehicle.”
It eliminates the bodhisattva being talked about in this part of the text with 
“the bodhisattva is also empty of the bodhisattva.”
It eliminates words for numbers with
“Subhūti, in emptiness there is no one, or two, or three,”
up to
“ten.”
 Summing up in conclusion by saying,
“Therefore, this is a vehicle… equally of the three time periods,”
what does that intend? Take “vehicle equally of the three time periods” as the final Great Vehicle, a Great Vehicle that is, in its nature, one alone because it is free of all differentiation. In it, “time,” “the equality of time,” “Great Vehicle,” and “bodhisattva” are all just simply emptiness. It eliminates them all, because “in this” all falsely imagined dharmas are nonexistent.
 Even having thus eliminated them, because all are, in their nature, one, it sums it all up in conclusion with, 
“Therefore, this is the vehicle of the bodhisattva great beings equally of the three time periods.”
 Having thus taught in brief, it gives a detailed explanation with,
“In this Great Vehicle you cannot apprehend same or not the same,”
and so on, eliminating all the branches.
“Same, or not the same,”
that is to say, different. As for,
“you cannot apprehend greed or free from greed,”
and so on, connect “greed” with “not the same,” and “free from greed” with “same.”
 Having thus taught that all the dharmas are not, as entities, two, with
“a past form, Subhūti, is empty of a past form,”
and so on, it names each separately and teaches that they do not exist. 
“Given that you cannot apprehend even emptiness because it is empty of emptiness, how could you ever apprehend a past form in emptiness?”
This means “given that” when you describe an emptiness connected to form, as in “form is empty,” even that very emptiness  is also falsely imagined and does not exist, “how could” there “ever” be “a form in” that “emptiness”?
 Having taught that 
“you cannot apprehend”
the dharmas—
“the perfection of giving”
and so on—
“in the equality”
of the three periods of time, what does is intend by
“given that you cannot apprehend even equality in the equality…”?
At the level of the final Great Vehicle, all dharmas—the perfection of giving and so on—are in the nature of maturations and are fully engaged with emptiness, so even “the equality of the three periods of time” does not exist there, and the perfection of giving and so on included in the three periods of time do not exist either. Therefore, it says
“how could you ever apprehend the past, future, and present perfection of giving in the equality?”
Similarly, connect this with them all.
 As for the subsections of this passage, they should be understood as:
the section eliminating the equality of the three time periods;the section eliminating all dharmas based on pairs;the section eliminating the three time periods in the five aggregate dharmas;the section eliminating the five aggregate dharmas included in the three time periods in emptiness;the section eliminating the six perfections in the equality of the three time periods;the section eliminating emptiness in that [equality];the section eliminating the applications of mindfulness and so on, up to, finally, the distinct attributes of a buddha in just that [equality];the section eliminating an ordinary person; andthe section eliminating śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and tathāgatas. 
“Therefore, it is the Great Vehicle of the bodhisattva great beings.”
It explains through a creative etymology that because it is the vehicle of the great ones it is the Great Vehicle.
The remaining sixteen questions
 The elder Pūrṇa, setting the scene for what is going to be discussed  next, says:
“Lord, tasked with the perfection of wisdom… this elder Subhūti thinks he has to give instruction in the Great Vehicle.”
 Earlier, at the start of the explanation of advice and instruction, “The Lord said to venerable Subhūti, ‘Subhūti, … be confident in your readiness to give a Dharma discourse to the bodhisattva great beings about how bodhisattva great beings go forth in the perfection of wisdom.’ ” He tasked him with the perfection of wisdom. Now [Pūrṇa’s] statement, prompted by Subhūti’s explanation of the Great Vehicle, wants, by means of that, to introduce the path that is going to be discussed next. 
“Let it not be the case, Lord, that I am giving instruction in the Great Vehicle, having violated the perfection of wisdom”
intends that the two—the perfection of wisdom and the Great Vehicle—are not different, so, by teaching the Great Vehicle, he has also taught the perfection of wisdom as well. So, it will make the statement at the end that
“by giving instruction in the Great Vehicle you have given instruction in the perfection of wisdom, and by giving instruction in the perfection of wisdom you have given instruction in the Great Vehicle.”
 The ten statements— 
“Lord, one does not apprehend a bodhisattva at the prior limit,”
and so on—teach the seed statements that are going to be discussed below.
 Among them, “one does not apprehend a bodhisattva at the prior limit” teaches that one does not apprehend a bodhisattva in the three time periods: one that existed before, that will exist in the future, or that exists now. 
 One does not apprehend a bodhisattva at these three limits, so one is limitless. Therefore, having taught that a bodhisattva has no limits, it next says,
“Lord, one has to know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva  through the limitlessness of form,”
and so on. This means that one should know that all dharmas, “form” and so on, do not have the three limits so they are in a limitless state; a bodhisattva is similarly limitless. 
 To someone who has the idea, “When one says that because form and so on are limitless a bodhisattva is limitless, well then, form and so on would become a bodhisattva,” it says, 
“Lord, even such an idea as ‘form is a bodhisattva’ does not exist and is not found,”
and so on. 
 Because one cannot apprehend a bodhisattva in the three periods of time one cannot apprehend a bodhisattva entity in form and so on, so a bodhisattva cannot be found. Because one cannot be found, the two,
“advice and instruction,”
do not exist either. 
“So, Lord, I, who thus do not find a bodhisattva great being as anyone at all in any way at all,”
and so on, is a teaching with just the meaning as the earlier teaching.
“You say this, Lord, that is, ‘bodhisattva.’ It is just a word.”
This is teaching that because bodhisattvas cannot be, they are simply just imaginary. Having thus taught that ultimately a bodhisattva does not exist, to give an example it says,
“To illustrate, Lord, you say ‘self’ again and again, but it has absolutely not come into being.”
Having taught like that, next it teaches that form and so on, both marked by coming into being and marked by not coming into being, do not exist. Among them, about the nonexistence of the mark of coming into being, it says,
“Lord, given that all phenomena thus have no intrinsic nature, what is that form that has come into being?”
and so on.  Form and so on are like an illusion, so they have nonexistence and nonproduction for their nature. Hence, they are not marked by coming into being. 
 After that, in order to teach the nonexistence of the mark of not coming into being, it says,
“Lord, what has come into being is not form,”
and so on. What it means is the mark of not coming into being is the mark of the thoroughly established; it is not falsely imagined form and so on.
 Having thus taught that because bodhisattvas are falsely imagined phenomena they are not suitable to be given advice, now, based on the bodhisattva who is the ultimate true nature of dharmas, it says,
“Lord, you cannot apprehend those bodhisattva great beings who would practice for awakening other than those who have not come into being, so does what has not come into being give advice and instruction in a perfection of wisdom that has not come into being?”
What this means is the ultimate bodhisattvas have the dharma-constituent as their intrinsic natures, so they are marked by not having come into being, and because they are beyond all thought construction it is not feasible to give them advice and instruction. 
 Having thus taught the ultimate bodhisattva, with 
“one should know that when the mind of a bodhisattva given such instruction is not cowed… then that bodhisattva great being is practicing the perfection of wisdom,”
it teaches the practice of the ultimate.
 From here on, from among the twenty-nine questions and statements set forth earlier, taking
“you are giving instruction in the Great Vehicle in harmony with the perfection of wisdom”
as the point of departure, that array of twelve authoritative statements of specific instructions must now be taught, and having been taught, must also be explained. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, because beings are nonexistent one does apprehend  a bodhisattva at the prior limit… at the later limit… or in the middle”
teaches that persons are without a self. Therefore, bodhisattvas did not exist at a time in the past, bodhisattvas will not exist at a time in the future, and bodhisattvas do not exist in the present time, and so 
“one does not come close to a bodhisattva”
in the three periods of time. 
 After that,
“because form is nonexistent one cannot find a bodhisattva at the prior limit,”
and so on, teaches that dharmas are selfless.
 They all
“are not two, nor are they divided”
intends that all are marked as thoroughly established so all are the same.
“Venerable Śāriputra, because suchness is nonexistent one does not come close to a bodhisattva at the prior limit,”
and so on. The suchness of the three periods of time and the suchness of a bodhisattva is falsely imagined and therefore does not exist. 
Why, Venerable Śāriputra, should one know the limitlessness of a bodhisattva through the limitlessness of form…?”
teaches the second statement, because there is no prior limit and so on of those that are not limited. 
 The third statement,
“Venerable Śāriputra, form is empty of form,”
means form that is the thoroughly established true dharmic nature is empty of the falsely imagined form. Therefore, it says
“in emptiness form does not exist,”
which means a falsely imagined form does not exist in the emptiness of form.
 The fourth statement,
“form is not found in form, form is not found in feeling,”
and so on, teaches that you do not find any dharmas when you seek for them in their own intrinsic nature or in something else’s intrinsic nature. This is explaining
“as anyone at all in any way at all.”
 The fifth statement is
“this—that is, ‘bodhisattva’—is  a name plucked out of thin air.”
Given that the nature of a bodhisattva is the emptiness of ultimate reality, conventionally, in order to give it a label, it is given the name “bodhisattva” plucked out of thin air. “Out of thin air” means not there intrinsically. 
“Because the words for all dharmas do not come from anywhere in the ten directions and do not go anywhere”
teaches that they do not exist. In reality they “do not come from anywhere” when they arise and “do not go anywhere” when they stop. 
 Having taught that not only is a bodhisattva just simply a name like that, but that all dharmas also do not come from anywhere and do not go anywhere, it sums up in conclusion with
“so too the word for a bodhisattva does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere.”
This means “the words for all dharmas,” “a bodhisattva,” and also “the word for a bodhisattva” do not exist. 
 Having thus taught that words do not exist, with
“because these—that is, ‘form,’ ‘feeling,’ ‘perception,’ ‘volitional factors,’ and ‘consciousness’—are simply just designated by names,”
and so on, teaching that falsely imagined dharmas are simply words, it then, with thus
“that name”—
the designation ‘form’—
“is not form,”
and so on, teaches that the form and so on that is the true nature of dharmas, and those names, are not different. It means “that”—the falsely imagined name “form”—is “ultimate form.”
 Having taught that, next, 
“because a name is empty of the intrinsic nature of a name. That which is empty is not the name,”
teaches the reason that the name and emptiness are different. It means a falsely imagined name is empty of the intrinsic nature of a name, and its emptiness is not the intrinsic nature of a name. Thus,  because names do not exist, and ultimate dharmas exist, those dharmas are the basic nature of the names. Hence the ultimate bodhisattva also does not have a name as its intrinsic nature. So, in order to teach that “bodhisattva” is a designation plucked out of thin air, it says
“so, one says ‘this, that is, “bodhisattva,” is just a word.’ ”
 Similarly, repeat this in the same way with the constituents, sense fields, and dependent origination.
 As for the perfections and so on being different, it says
“in that perfection of giving also there are no words and in those words there is no perfection of giving.”
The perfection of giving and so on are just falsely imagined, and the words are just falsely imagined too. The words are not lodged in the perfection of giving and the perfection of giving is not lodged in the words; both are like illusions because they are not real things. Therefore, it says
“both those words and that perfection of giving do not exist and cannot be found.”
Connect this with them all in the same way. 
 The sixth statement is,
“Venerable Śāriputra, given that a self absolutely does not exist and is not found, how could it have ever come into being?”
and so on. Given that persons—a “self” and so on—and dharmas—“form” and so on—“absolutely do not exist,” are not there, how could they “come into being” and originate? Hence it teaches all dharmas as marked by absolutely not coming into being. Take “does not come into being” as emptiness. 
 The seventh statement is,
“An intrinsic nature arisen from a union does not exist.”
“An intrinsic nature” is an essence. Just that which is its own, not something else’s, is its “essence.” All dharmas, form and so on,  originate dependently, not independently. A person originates dependent on something else. They are just there because of something else; they are not there because of themselves. Therefore, 
“given that all dharmas thus are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, … an intrinsic nature… does not exist.”
Therefore, that which is the emptiness that serves to enable falsely imagined form and so on is not a dependent origination; it is not contingent on something else, so it is feasible that just that is the intrinsic nature of all dharmas. Hence it says that “an intrinsic nature arisen from a union does not exist.” This means that what has arisen from a union is not an intrinsic nature. When everything has come together it arises, hence “arisen from a union.” This means arising from a collection of causes and conditions. 
 The explanation of that is in three subsections. One is “it has no intrinsic nature because it is arisen from a union”; one is “it has no intrinsic nature because it is impermanent and so on”; and one is “it has no intrinsic nature because it is unmoved and is not destroyed.”
“Furthermore, Venerable Śāriputra, all dharmas are impermanent but not because anything disappears.”
The Śrāvaka Vehicle takes as “impermanent” a dharma that has arisen, parted, and is destroyed. Here it teaches the mark of impermanence as not being like that; it is
“not because anything disappears.”
In this Great Vehicle it says “the meaning of impermanence is the meaning of a nonexistent thing,” so take the word impermanence as nonexistence. How so? The opposite of permanence is impermanence. Take something permanent to be something always there, and hence take impermanent to be something that is always not there. What is called impermanent is always, in all time periods, not there, therefore it says “the meaning of a nonexistent thing is the meaning of impermanence.” What it means is because all falsely imagined dharmas, form and so on, are impermanent—that is, are not existent things—there is nothing at all that has changed from existing.
 In 
“Venerable Śāriputra, it is because something impermanent is a nonexistent thing and has come to an end,”
take the word impermanent—not existing and not a real thing—as emptiness; construe the words come to an end with falsely imagined dharmas. Thus, it means an impermanence is an emptiness, falsely imagined dharmas have come to an end, a nonexistence. Thus “all dharmas are impermanent” is in fact teaching that “all dharmas do not exist as real things.” It is therefore teaching the thoroughly established nature of all dharmas marked by suchness—that “all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.”
“Similarly, all dharmas are suffering.”
All falsely imagined dharmas—form and so on—when settled down on and appropriated in the form of real things, become the cause of the three sufferings, so they are said to be “suffering.” When falsely imagined forms are understood in their nature to be unreal things, are not settled down on and are forsaken, they become the cause of the nonexistence of suffering and are therefore pleasure. Therefore, suffering should be called falsely imagined dharmas. “All dharmas are suffering” teaches that the falsely imagined phenomena are exclusively marked by not being real. Because they are not real in their nature all dharmas are “suffering.” 
 Here too construe suffering with “but not because anything disappears.” This means that suffering does not occur because anything that exists in the form of pleasure has disappeared; it is suffering because it is not real. 
 Similarly, 
“suffering is a nonexistent thing and has come to an end.”
This means falsely imagined dharmas that have come to an end, that are not real things and do not exist, but have been erroneously settled down on are “suffering.” Also, they are 
“selfless,” 
“not because anything disappears,” but because they are selfless and without an intrinsic nature. 
“Something selfless is a nonexistent thing and has come to an end”
means just that nonexistence of dharmas that have come to an end is “selfless.” Construe them all like that.
“All dharmas are neither unmoved nor destroyed.”
This also teaches a reason that they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. You can suppose falsely imagined phenomena have a certain intrinsic nature that might be “unmoved,” permanent, or might be “destroyed,” impermanent. Because, like an illusion of form, they have no intrinsic nature, they are not permanent and they are not impermanent. You cannot say of an illusion of form that it is “permanent” or “impermanent”; therefore, “all dharmas are neither unmoved nor destroyed.”
 In the eighth statement, in regard to
“form has not occasioned anything,”
“form” and so on have “not occasioned anything”
“because someone to enact them does not exist.”
Therefore they
“have not come into being.”
This is teaching that all dharmas have emptiness for their intrinsic nature. 
 In the ninth statement,
“Form is empty of a basic nature, and what is empty of a basic nature does not arise and does not pass away, and in what does not arise and does not pass away there is no transformation,”
the “basic nature,” the intrinsic nature, of dharmas like form and so on is emptiness. Emptiness is the intrinsic nature of all dharmas. 
“What is empty of a basic nature does not arise and does not pass away.”
In thoroughly established phenomena that are empty in their nature the two—arising and stopping—do not exist, and when those two do not exist, “there is no” aging or “transformation.” Thus, there is no intrinsic arising, stopping, and transformation, so that which is form and so on endowed with arising, stopping, and transformation, marked  as a falsely imagined phenomenon, and coming into being, ultimately does not come into being and therefore does not exist. Therefore, it says 
“what has not come into being is not form,”
up to
“what has not come into being is not consciousness,”
and so on.
 In the tenth statement,
“what has not come into being is the perfection of wisdom, and the perfection of wisdom is what has not come into being,”
take the words “what has not come into being” as suchness, that is, as emptiness; take the words “the perfection of wisdom” as suchness too. So the two—something that has not come into being and the perfection of wisdom—are not different. Therefore, it says,
“Does what has not come into being give advice and instruction in a perfection of wisdom that has not come into being?”
This means how will emptiness give advice to emptiness?
 In the eleventh statement,
“do not see ‘what has not come into being as one thing and a bodhisattva as another,’ ”
it teaches that a bodhisattva great being is the emptiness of an intrinsic nature. 
“What has not come into being and form are not two”
is teaching from the perspective of the true dharmic nature of form. 
 In the twelfth statement, it means when they examine
“all dharmas”
they are similar to
“an illusion, a mirage,”
and so on, and 
“they do not feel cowed by or tremble”
at anything.
[1034] 
Part Two
The results of paying attention to the nonconceptual
Having thus first taught paying attention to the nonconceptual, it then teaches the result of those attentions, with
“they do not then grasp, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on form, and neither do they label anything ‘this is form.’ ”
Thus, it makes five statements in order to teach the stages of grasping.  At the start they do not grasp by forming an idea; they do not accept with the thinking mind; they do not base themselves on it with the intellect; then they do not settle down on it with a view; and then they do not label it for others with a word. 
“And why? Lord, it is because form is not produced, and the nonproduction of form is not form. Therefore form and nonproduction are not two nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because that nonproduction is not one nor is it many.”
Here form that is “not produced” means the true dharmic nature of form that is not produced. “The nonproduction of form is not form”: suchness, “the nonproduction of” that true dharmic nature of “form,” “is not” in its intrinsic nature falsely imagined “form.” 
 In that case, what does “therefore form and nonproduction are not two nor are they divided” teach? There, the statement “form is not produced” teaches the thoroughly established, unproduced intrinsic nature. This “nonproduction of form is not form” teaches that the mark of the falsely imagined phenomenon is absent from nonproduction. Thus, it means the true dharmic nature of form, the intrinsic nature of which is nonproduction, is the intrinsic nature of nonproduction and also of the true nature of dharmas, so “form” and “not produced” are the same, that is, are not different. 
 The “nonproduction” in this “nonproduction is not one nor is it many” is suchness. There is no specific number “one” or “two” or “three” for that. So, it means that because specific particulars are absent from nonproduction, when thoroughly established, they all, form and so on, are a single nature. 
 Hence “the nonproduction of form  is not form” means the true nature of dharmas that is the nonproduction of the true dharmic nature of form is not the intrinsic nature of falsely imagined form.
“Lord, suchness is not produced, and the nonproduction of suchness is not suchness. Therefore, suchness and nonproduction are not two nor are they divided.”
Construe this based on stained and unstained suchness. 
“Lord, it is because form is impermanent, so a decrease in form is not form. … Therefore, form and a decrease are not two nor are they divided. And why? Lord, it is because a decrease is not one nor is it many.”
Here, because it says “the meaning of impermanence is the meaning of a nonexistent thing,” “impermanent” form means form that “is a nonexistent thing.” “A decrease in form is not form”—“a decrease” is because of a change in the falsely imagined aspect in the form that is a nonexistent thing. That which is “a decrease in” falsely imagined “form is not” the true dharmic nature of “form.”
 “Therefore, form and a decrease are not two nor are they divided” means because both “form and a decrease” are falsely imagined and nonexistent things they are therefore just one. 
 “Lord, it is because a decrease is not one nor is it many.” A decrease does not exist, so, like an illusion of form, ultimately it has no specific particular number. Therefore, all falsely imagined things are just one as nonexistent things. 
 “So, a decrease in form is not form.”  This means “a decrease in” falsely imagined “form is not” the intrinsic nature of the true dharmic nature of “form.” 
“Lord, suchness is impermanent, so a decrease in suchness is not suchness.”
Here also construe the particular stained and unstained suchness. Thus, it is “impermanent” because from the one that was stained before comes about an unstained one later. Thus construe it as: the “suchness that is impermanent”—the “decrease” that is “the suchness of form,” “the suchness of feeling,” and so on—“is not” the thoroughly established “suchness.” 
 Where it says,
“Lord, anything called form is counted as not two,”
“not two” is the true nature of dharmas, the ultimate. “Counted” in that ultimate are these, namely, “form,”
“feeling,”
and so on. What is this teaching? It means that even while the ultimate is just one, is “not two,” with the words “form that is the true nature of dharmas, feeling that is the true nature of dharmas, perception that is the true nature of dharmas, volitional factors that are the true nature of dharmas, and consciousness that is the true nature of dharmas” it teaches the one nondual ultimate, having divided it into many aspects.
 With that you should connect
“then venerable Śāriputra inquired of venerable Subhūti”
as follows. In the immediately preceding teaching about the result of the attentions to the nonconceptual, the elder Subhūti gave an explanation in four connected sections: first,
“When bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom investigate those dharmas like that they do not then grasp, do not accept, do not base themselves on, and do not settle down on form, and neither do they label anything ‘this is form’ ”; 
second, 
“form is not produced, and the nonproduction of form is not form,”
and so on; third, 
“a decrease in form is not form”; 
and fourth, 
“anything called form is counted as not two.”
The elder Śāriputra, taking these four connected sections as his point of departure, asks the questions because he wants to hear a more detailed explanation.
 Among these, in the first section, taking the three parts of the statement, “bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom investigate those dharmas like that,” as the point of departure, it asks three questions:
“What is a bodhisattva? What is the perfection of wisdom? What is it to investigate?”
They will be explained sequentially.
 In 
“they are called bodhisattvas because awakening is itself their state of being,”
take “awakening” as the dharma body. All “beings” have the dharma body as their nature, therefore bodhisattvas also have just “awakening” as their nature. So, it means they are called bodhisattvas because awakening is their nature, and because they are beings.
 In that case, would not all beings then become bodhisattvas? There is not this fault here, because in the passage in general it wants to convey a special quality, so it is calling particular beings connected with awakening bodhisattvas. Thus, beings other than them who are not seeking for the knowledge of all aspects and who do not establish that state of being, are not connected in any way with awakening, so it is beings connected with awakening in particular who are being called bodhisattvas.
 Therefore, it also teaches their special practice:
“And with that awakening they know the aspects of dharmas but they do not settle down on those dharmas.”
They “know” them as conventional truth, but ultimately “do not settle down on” them. 
“Whatever the attributes, tokens, and signs on account of which”—
this teaches the “attributes” through which dharmas are formulated. The two—“tokens and signs”—are explaining those. Names,  designations, conventional terms and so on are “tokens”; characteristic marks and behaviors are “signs.” 
“Venerable Śāriputra, that which is called perfection of wisdom has gone far off.”
Because wisdom that has gone to the other side of all dharmas has gone far off from those dharmas, it 
“is called wisdom gone to the other side.”
“To investigate”
is realizing through skillful means and reasoning.
 After that, the second section is taught by,
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘…the nonproduction of form is not form…,’ ”
and so on.
“Venerable Śāriputra, form is empty of form”
means falsely imagined form does not exist as the real basis of form. 
“The emptiness of form is not form, and is not production.”
The emptiness of a basic nature that is the true dharmic nature of form is not the intrinsic nature of form, and it is also not the intrinsic nature of production. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, the nonproduction of form is not form”
means because falsely imagined form does not arise and does not have arising as its intrinsic nature, therefore nonproduction is thus established as not form. 
 After that, with
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘It is because a decrease in form is not form,’ ”
and so on, it teaches the third section. Form and decrease are both 
“not conjoined and not disjoined”—
in the way explained before, form is a construct, and decrease is also a construct, so both 
“have no mark.”
 In the fourth connected section, 
“nonproduction is not one thing and form another; nonproduction itself is form, and form itself is nonproduction.”
In the way explained before, take “form”  and “nonproduction” as the true nature of dharmas. Hence, they are 
“not two.”
 As for 
“they then view the nonproduction of form,”
this means they directly realize suchness. As before, it says “the nonproduction of form” because the true dharmic nature of form and suchness are the same.
The questions and responses of the two elders 
 From here on there are the probing questions and responses of the two elders.
 What does
“Venerable Subhūti, if form is a nonproduction, up to the buddhadharmas are a nonproduction, then, Venerable Subhūti, will śrāvakas not have already gained śrāvaka awakening,”
and so on, teach? 
 If “form,” and so on, and suchness were the same, in that case the understanding of form would be the understanding of suchness, and all beings would see the ultimate as well. Were they to do so, all beings would each properly reach their own respective awakening without having to concentrate on it. And then 
“the five awakenings”
would not be differentiable. stream enterer, once-returner, non-returner, worthy one, a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and the knowledge of all aspects would be mixed up. Were that to be the case, stream enterers and so on would also be buddhas. Bodhisattvas would have already gained their awakening, so to
“undertake the difficult practices”
and so on would be meaningless, and the knowledge of all aspects, complete awakening, and
“turning the wheel of the Dharma”
would be meaningless as well.
“Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that an unproduced dharma has an attainment, or a clear realization. I do not accept that which is unproduced becomes a stream enterer. I do not accept that which is unproduced has the result of stream enterer.”
What does this teach?  Nobody can attain or have a clear realization of an unproduced dharma. Given that it is unproduced, no one at all becomes a stream enterer. The elimination of mere falsely imagined obscurations, because the conceptualization of a grasper and grasped does not exist, are accepted to be the attainment and clear realization. So, it is teaching that “suchness does not realize suchness,” and hence the aforementioned fault that “the understanding of form and so on will be the understanding of suchness” is not a fault, because there are afflictive obscurations and obscurations to knowledge. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that bodhisattvas are undertaking difficult practices.”
It explains this because ultimately bodhisattvas do not have such conceptualizations. At the eighth level when bodhisattvas gain forbearance for dharmas that are not produced and do not apprehend any dharma at all, they undertake difficult practices free from production and so on. At that time bodhisattvas have a nonapprehending attention and do not have 
“the idea of difficulty”
when it comes to cutting off their heads and so on, or “any idea of suffering at all.” The concluding passage,
“bodhisattva great beings do not appropriate and do not apprehend any dharma as anything in any way at all,” 
teaches that. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, in the absence of production I do not accept that there is the state of a tathāgata,”
and so on—“in the absence of production” in the dharma body “I do not accept that there is” any tathāgata that is a second tathāgata realizing the absence of production. Hence this is teaching the unproduced state, that “a tathāgata” is the unproduced state, perfect complete awakening. 
“I do not accept that an unproduced dharma attains an unproduced attainment.”
“I do not accept” that suchness realizes suchness is the meaning. 
 He says that, and then the elder Śāriputra asks about  two alternatives: Given that something unproduced does not attain an unproduced attainment, does something unproduced attain a produced attainment, or does something produced attain an unproduced attainment?
“Well then, Venerable Subhūti, does an unproduced dharma attain a produced attainment, or does a produced dharma attain an unproduced attainment?”
If something in the nature of suchness were to attain the falsely imagined results of stream enterer and so on, then “an unproduced dharma would attain a produced attainment.” Were falsely imagined persons to attain the results of stream enterer and so on that are in the nature of suchness, then “a produced dharma would attain an unproduced attainment.” 
 Since he is unable to accept either of them he says,
“Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that a produced dharma attains an unproduced attainment,”
and so on.
“There is an attainment and there is a clear realization, but not in a dual way.”
This is teaching that even though both an attainment of the unproduced by the produced, and an attainment of the produced by the unproduced, do not exist, still, on the mere abandonment of afflictive obscurations and obscurations to knowledge,
“attainment and clear realization are labeled by ordinary convention,”
and the person is labeled
“stream enterer, tathāgata,”
and so on. 
“Venerable Subhūti, is the unproduced similar to the attainment and clear realization that, as ordinary convention, is formless, cannot be pointed out, does not block, and has only one mark—that is, no mark?”
Śāriputra is asking if the unproduced is, like attainment and clear realization, also ultimately nonexistent.
“Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra”
teaches that because, ultimately, an unproduced cannot be grasped and cannot be expressed, it does not exist in an unproduced form.
 Now, because even production is eliminated, it says,
“Venerable Śāriputra,  because of this one of many explanations neither is production produced nor is nonproduction produced.”
This means the “unproduced” is the thoroughly established so it is not produced; the “produced” is the falsely imagined so it is nonexistent and therefore not produced, so in “this one of many explanations… production” also does not exist.
“Venerable Subhūti, you are confident in your readiness to say again and again that ‘dharmas are unproduced’? You are also confident in your readiness to say there is no production of unproduced dharmas?”
Both the terms “unproduced” and “no production” are well-known synonyms for suchness. When those two are differentiated as particulars qualifying the word “dharma”—“an unproduced dharma” and “a dharma of which there is no production”—they become words for falsely imagined dharmas. 
 When asked if it is appropriate to say that, the elder Subhūti again, having thought about whether the two terms “unproduced” and “no production” are well known as falsely imagined words, says,
“Venerable Śāriputra, I have no ready confidence to say again and again that dharmas are unproduced. I have no ready confidence to say there is no production of unproduced dharmas.”
 Then, teaching that the two—unproduced and no production—are just falsely imagined, it says,
“And why? Because, Venerable Śāriputra, an unproduced dharma, nonproduction, ready confidence, saying something, and a state of production—all those dharmas are not conjoined and not disjoined, are formless, cannot be pointed out, do not obstruct, and have only one mark—that is, no mark.”
In this statement about a ready confidence to say something about unproduced dharmas and no production, these six dharmas are indicated: unproduced, nonproduction, the absence of a state of production, a dharma, ready confidence, and saying something. That they are all falsely imagined and hence do not exist is the meaning. 
 You can suppose dharmas that exist are mental factors, not conjoined with mind, with form, or uncompounded. There, “those dharmas are not conjoined” teaches that they do not exist as real mental factors; they “are not disjoined” teaches that they do not exist as real things not conjoined with mind; they “are formless” teaches that they do not exist as existent things with form like the eleven forms that are nonrevealing and so on; they “cannot be pointed out” teaches that they do not exist as things like colors that can be pointed out; they “do not block” teaches that they do not exist with the mark of the form of a sense faculty; and they “have only one mark—that is, no mark”—teaches that they do not exist with the mark of the uncompounded, which is to say, there is no dharma at all that is “the mark of the uncompounded.” This means it does not exist, so they are liberated from the mark of existence and nonexistence and hence are without a mark, that is, they “have one mark”—marked by being without a mark. 
 Then the elder Śāriputra asks if saying something and so on are also nonproductions.
“Venerable Subhūti, is there is no production of saying, is there also no production of ready confidence, and is there also no production of a dharma? Are those dharmas that are the point of departure for a ready confidence to say something also not produced?”
This means: Do “saying,” “ready confidence,” and all “dharmas” and dharmas that have to be said have nonproduction as their intrinsic nature?
 Then the elder Subhūti says
“exactly so,”
asserting that they all have nonproduction as their intrinsic nature. 
 Having said,
“There is no production of saying, there is also no production of ready confidence, and there is also no production of a dharma. Those dharmas that are the point of departure for a ready confidence to say something are not produced,” 
with 
“there is no production of form,”
and so on, it teaches that they all have nonproduction as their intrinsic nature, teaching just what has been taught before in the section on nonproduction. Also, in this teaching it gives a reminder of the aforementioned faults—“in that case will the five forms of life not be differentiable” and so on—and gives a response to them. As for
“Venerable Śāriputra, just as attainment and clear realization exist as ordinary conventions, similarly,”
and so on, it means “just as” ultimately both “attainment and clear realization” do not exist, and “stream enterer” and so on also do not exist, “similarly,” because the three vehicles are also simply just suchness, there are ultimately no differences in the results. 
 There are those who have gone wrong, thinking, “But earlier, when accumulating the accumulations during three incalculable eons, there are the particular different actions, there are particular different maturations corresponding to those, and similarly, during the result period there are different afflictive obscurations and obscurations to knowing that have been produced and not produced, so, based on just those, there are differences in defilement and purification.” So it says,
“Venerable Śāriputra, it is because ultimately there is no maturation of karma, there is no production, there is no cessation, there is no defilement, and there is no purification.”
This means they are all falsely imagined phenomena and do not exist, so suchness does not become different on account of them.
 Having thus eliminated an unproduced dharma, to eliminate a dharma that arises again it starts by asking a question:
“Venerable Subhūti, is an unproduced dharma produced or is a produced dharma produced?”
Here it is asking,  given that a seedling and so on is produced from a seed, is that production of a seedling the production of one that has not come into being—is it “unproduced”—or is it the production of one that has come into being—is it already “produced”? 
 Having been asked that, the elder says that if an unproduced seedling is produced, everything unproduced would also be produced indeterminately, and if the already produced is produced, it would come to be produced repeatedly again and again, so, because being produced and so on is contradicted by these lines of reasoning, it is not appropriate to say it is like either:
“Venerable Śāriputra, I do not accept that an unproduced dharma is produced, nor do I accept that a produced dharma is produced.”
This means the unproduced does not exist because it is in a state of nonexistence, and because it is nonexistent it is not produced. Furthermore, the produced, because it is already in a produced state, does not arise again. Ultimately, therefore, the attribute of arising is just nonexistent. 
 Saying that prompts these questions: “Are certain unproduced attributes—a rabbit’s horns and so on—not produced? Or are past productions not produced?” So there are these two questions:
“Venerable Subhūti, what unproduced dharma do you not accept is produced?”
and 
“What produced dharma do you not accept is produced?”
 To eliminate arising, again it says,
“Venerable Subhūti, is a dharma that has not been produced, produced; or is a dharma that has been produced, produced?”
A nonproduction is not produced because it is an uncompounded phenomenon, and a production is not produced because it is a falsely imagined phenomenon and does not exist, so the elder says, 
“Venerable Śāriputra, the unproduced is not produced, and the produced is not produced either,”
and as the reason for that says,
“Venerable Śāriputra, it is because both produced and unproduced dharmas are not conjoined and not disjoined because there is no production,”
having in mind that both are nevertheless ultimately simply just suchness. 
 Having taught that, it teaches just what has been taught before in the section on nonproduction. Thus, there is the teaching from
“there is no production of form,” 
up to
“there is no production of the knowledge of all aspects.”
It sums up in conclusion with,
“Venerable Śāriputra, because of this one of many explanations, there is no production of saying, there is also no production of ready confidence, and there is also no production of a dharma; those dharmas that are the point of departure for a ready confidence to say something are not produced.”
“Venerable Śāriputra, form is empty of a basic nature”
teaches the true dharmic nature of form, so it says,
“It has no fixed position inside, it has no fixed position outside, and it cannot be apprehended without both.”
Were it to have a “fixed position” in something, you can suppose it would have a fixed position either “inside, outside,” or in something other than “both.” Because ultimately it does not exist in all three, therefore “it has no fixed position.”
 Having taught that, it elaborates excellently the marks of just that fixed position and no fixed position and teaches the means to 
“purify the awakening path” 
with
“there is an ordinary… and there is an extraordinary”
one and so on. 
“It does not move from, does not transcend, and does not pass beyond the ordinary world,”
beyond falsely imagined phenomena. The three are based on the small, middling, and big forbearance. The meaning of the rest is clear.
 As for the seven statements
“as which the world (as subject) exists,”
and so on, there
in some places the word world is to be taken as the five aggregates;in some places it is to be taken as the world as inhabitants;in some places the container world;in some places the world of ordinary beings;in some places the cycle of existences;in some places falsely imagined dharmas; andin some places as the five sorts of sense object.
“On account of them the world is here”—
the world as aggregates; 
“on account of them the world is established”—
the container world;
“the world is the same as them”—
the same as falsely imagined phenomena; 
“on account of them there is something given to the world”—
the five sorts of sense objects are given to the world; 
“on account of them they do not escape the world”—
from the world that is the cycle of existences;
“they are for the coming into being of the world”—
the world as ordinary beings, because to come into being is to increase; and
“they come into being in the world”—
the world as inhabitants comes into being in the container world.
“On account of them the world goes free”—
the world as inhabitants;
“they eliminate the world”—
the five sorts of sense objects;
“on account of them a world causes an escape”—
the world as a superior person. As for
“those that are not the world”— 
these are thoroughly established phenomena. As for
“the world from which they will escape”— 
they escape from the world of the cycle of existences. As for
“those who free from the world”— 
this is from the container world; as for
“those who free in the world”—
this is in the worlds where there is Dharma.
“Excellent, excellent, Venerable Śāriputra. I will object to Venerable Śāriputra in that Venerable Śāriputra has got at just what is meant by expressing the statement as an absolute.”
This is a statement, stated in three parts, rejoicing in what Śāriputra has said. It teaches that it is excellent, that there are logical objections to it, and that it has got at the meaning.
“You should know that the nonexistence of attention is because of the nonexistence of a being; you should know that the emptiness of attention is because of the emptiness of a being; you should know that the isolation of attention is because of the isolation of a being; you should know that the absence of an intrinsic nature in attention is because of the absence of an intrinsic nature in a being; and you should know that there is no full awakening of attention because there is no full awakening of a being.”
There are no other than those five attentions so it is teaching that they too are not the bodhisattva.  Therefore, it teaches:
“I say bodhisattva great beings are not separated from staying in this state or from this attention.”
Explanation of the Detailed Teaching
Part One
Explanation of Chapters 22 and 23 
 Thus, first of all, along with a teaching of miraculous powers and along with a teaching of the results, the intermediate explanation of the perfection of wisdom has been completed. As explained, the Tathāgata in this perfection of wisdom gives a threefold teaching: brief, middling, and detailed. Of them, the teaching in brief and middling modes based on trainees is finished.
 From here on, having brought unmatured trainees to maturity by removing doubts that have arisen, a detailed teaching in two parts, divided into the conventional and ultimate modes, causes those who have been brought to maturity to realize the meaning of true reality. 
 Then,
“all the Four Mahārājas stationed in the great billion world systems together with many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion gods were assembled in that very retinue,”
and so on. Why is it also teaching that they are all assembled on the occasion of a discourse powered by the Tathāgata? 
 You should know that this teaching of the perfection of wisdom is unprecedented, so there has to be a brief teaching about the retinue assembling, as a prior indicator that there is going to be an unprecedented teaching of the Dharma. Also, the show of light where he demonstrates emitting light rays and arraying light is done as a prior indicator that there is going to be an explanation of the Dharma.
 Why does the chief of the gods not address his questions to the Tathāgata? Why does he ask the elder Subhūti? 
 At that time, those in the retinue are to be trained by an explanation by a śrāvaka, so, by way of asking him, they also have asked the Tathāgata. 
“How should bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of wisdom? What is the bodhisattva great beings’  perfection of wisdom? And how should bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom?”
The answers to these three questions are explained below. 
What is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom?
 There, previously, taking the knowledge of all aspects as the point of departure, it gave a middle-length explanation based on the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom. Here, taking the knowledge of path aspects as the point of departure, it teaches the conceptual and nonconceptual perfection of wisdom that is the practice of bodhisattvas.
“Those who have entered into flawlessness are incapable of producing the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
Take this as saying that those fixed in a state of error are, for the time being, without good fortune. 
“And yet if they also produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening I still rejoice in them also.”
If they hear this explanation it will not be in vain, because a scripture says, “On the other side of infinite, countless thousands of hundreds of one hundred million billion eons they will enter into buddhahood.”
“Kauśika, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom?”
and so on. This is the middle of the three questions but is being taught here first because if it is taught thus, it is easier to understand. 
 Even though it is true that this perfection of wisdom is the all-knowledge side for the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels and the knowledge of path aspects side for the bodhisattva levels, here in this knowledge of path aspects that has to be taught to a bodhisattva who wants to attain the knowledge of all aspects there are both. 
 There, in regard to the all-knowledge side, you should know that
“Kauśika, here bodhisattva great beings with a thought of awakening connected with the knowledge of all aspects should pay attention to form  as impermanent, and they should pay attention to it as suffering, selfless, empty, a disease, a boil,”
and so on, is an explanation teaching the fifteen attentions, and is teaching the seven attentions focused on the cessation of dependent origination.
 In regard to the knowledge of path aspects side, it teaches that, with the nonapprehending attentions to the
“perfections,”
up to
“the distinct attributes,”
and with
“putting one part of the picture together with the other parts,”
and so on. 
 Among these, I will explain the words “impermanent” and so on, in the way they are on the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels. 
 They pay attention to [“form” and so on] as
“impermanent”
because what has not come into being comes into being, and what has come into being becomes nonexistent. They are 
“suffering”
because they have as their nature the three sufferings and because they become a cause for the suffering of others. They are
“selfless”
because, since they are without any agency and so on, they do not have their own defining mark. They are
“empty”
like the trunk of a plantain tree because they are hollow inside, and hence empty of an inner self. They are a
“disease”
because like a disease they require many conditions for a cure and are the root of physical and mental suffering. They are a
“boil”
because like a boil they oppress with obsession, drip with the pus of the afflictions, and gradually swell up, ripen, and burst with birth, old age, and death. They are a 
“thorn”
because like a thorn they pierce with inner and outer trouble and are hard to treat. They are a 
“misfortune”
because like the wicked they are to be criticized and they become oppressive. They are 
“dependent”
because they labor in the face of conditions and they labor in the work of ‘making it mine,’ so they have no agency except from others. They are 
“headed to destruction”
because 
“by their nature”
they are thoroughly destroyed by sickness, old age, and death. They are 
“shaky”
because they have the three marks of a compounded phenomenon and have the eight fickle worldly dharmas. They are
“brittle”
because it is in their inner nature to be destroyed and because they are destroyed by something harming them. They are 
“a hazard”
because “the absence of hazards” is peace, is pleasure, and is the antidote, and they are the cause of all fears. They are 
“persecution”
because even when they are not felt, they persecute in various harmful ways. They are
“a headache”
because they hurt in many ways like a nagging demon and a headache. 
 As for 
“they should pay attention to cessations as selfless, calm,”
and so on, construe them as “selfless” because they are devoid of the mark of a self; “calm” because all suffering is calmed; 
“isolated”
because they are without afflictions; 
“emptiness”
because they are endowed with the emptiness of a self and what belongs to a self; 
“signlessness”
because they are without all the causal signs of compounded phenomena; 
“wishlessness”
because they do not wish for anything in the three realms; and a
“nonenactment”
because karma does not bring anything about later. 
“Putting one part of the picture together with the other parts,”
and so on—“putting together” is paying attention to the thought of awakening, the thought of the wholesome root, and the thought of dedication touching each other. They
“analyze”
when they pay attention to all three not having the other’s intrinsic nature as its own intrinsic nature. They 
“complete”
when they pay attention to the meaning that has already been explained that all three are “inconceivable because they are not thought, not thought because they are inconceivable.”
“This not settling down on… any one part, even while thus making an examination of all the parts of the picture”
is the 
“extending”
completely. This is the fourth detailed and thorough analysis of all the dharmas as selfless. 
“The bodhisattva great beings’ thought of the wholesome roots is not touched by the thought of awakening.”
What does this teach?
 Earlier bodhisattvas, having made a dedication in general with conventional attention—”I dedicate these wholesome roots  to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening”—after having made an examination in the ultimate mode, since the thought of the wholesome root, the thought of awakening, and the thought of dedication do not touch each other, they examine whether, since they do not touch, dedication exists or not.
 Here some say the thoughts have not touched, but still a specific volitional factor produced through the force of an earlier thought, simultaneous with the later thought, does touch, so all the volitional factors become complete in the final thought of all. In this way, therefore, thoughts have touched. 
 To eliminate that, it says
“the thought of the wholesome roots does not exist… in the thought of awakening,”
and so on. It means that thought is not in the other thought, by way of a volitional factor left as a residual impression and so on. It says this because having thus taught that the actual thought does not exist, there is no volitional factor left as a residual impression and so on, like an entity that is the sharpness or dullness of a rabbit’s horn.
 Having thus investigated and found that it does not exist in the intrinsic nature of the others, they also investigate and find that it does not exist in its own intrinsic nature:
“the thought of the wholesome roots does not exist in the thought of the wholesome roots, the thought of awakening does not exist in the thought of awakening,”
and so on. This is because when it is seen as just suchness there is no such investigation. 
“Kauśika, the thought of the wholesome roots is no thought,”
and so on, teaches that it is just mere suchness. From the perspective of its own true dharmic nature, thought is free from falsely imagined thought so the intrinsic nature that is the nonexistence of thought comes to be known as the true dharmic nature of thought.
“A nonexistent thought does not touch a nonexistent thought,”
and so on. This is teaching that other than what comes to be known as the true dharmic nature of thought, no touching or existing or dedication comes to be known in any way at all. At that time  it is a self-reflexive analytic knowledge beyond the path of the conceivable, hence it is
“inconceivable”
and is
“no thought.”
“Kauśika, this is the bodhisattva great beings’ perfection of wisdom”
means it is nonconceptual wisdom that has gone to the other side. 
 Thus, conventionally they are “analytically investigating all phenomena,” but ultimately “not settling down on and not apprehending any phenomenon.”
 What does 
“I have to feel a sense of appreciation, Lord, and not feel no sense of appreciation” 
teach? It teaches that earlier when our Lord was in the form of a bodhisattva, the great śrāvakas in the retinue of earlier tathāgatas taught him with advice and instruction, inspiring him to take it up, and inspiring him to perfectly practice what he had found. Having gradually accomplished their teaching he became completely awakened. Therefore, they too, by advising and instructing these bodhisattvas in this retinue, will establish them in perfect practice. When they have gradually accomplished that earlier teaching, they will become completely awakened. Therefore, I should show appreciation to the earlier śrāvakas. 
 What is the difference between the words
“advised and instructed”
and so on? Here there are the three periods: starting, middle, and end. At the start they have to be “advised and instructed.” In the middle there is practice, and at the end the result. 
 There during the starting period “advice” is saying, “Do not do this,” preventing them from doing what they should not do. “Instruction” is saying, “Do this,” connecting them with the activities. 
 In the middle there are four periods: not practicing, practicing incorrectly, practicing a bit, and practicing perfectly. 
 There, those who do not practice out of ignorance are inspired to practice  when they are
“taught.”
Those who have set out incorrectly because of incorrect knowledge are connected with a perfect practice when they are 
“made to take them up.”
Those who, because of the fault of laziness and so on, practice a bit, become inspired to try to persevere when they are 
“made… excited.”
Having rejoiced, saying “excellent” to those who have set out perfectly with wisdom, they are connected with true reality when they are 
“motivated.”
At the end, they are
“caused… to enter into… and established”
in the result. Construe them like that. 
How should bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of wisdom?
 After that, in reference to the question, ‘How should they stand?’ it teaches that they should forsake where 
“they should not stand,”
and, standing where they should stand, they
“should stand in the perfection of wisdom.”
“Form is empty of form,”
and so on, teaches that the realization of emptiness is where they stand. 
“By way of apprehending something”
is where they should not stand. Therefore, this teaches that because these falsely imagined phenomena, form and so on, do not exist through the intrinsic nature of form and so on, bodhisattvas also do not exist through the intrinsic nature of a bodhisattva, and their emptinesses are not different, they are one. Therefore, form and so on in its true dharmic nature is a thoroughly established phenomenon, and a bodhisattva furthermore is
“not two,”
so to stand in their same true dharmic nature is to stand in the perfection of wisdom. 
In the section of the text explaining where not to stand, furthermore, the teaching is in three parts. First they should not stand in the dharmas; second they should not stand in the true nature of dharmas; and third they should not stand as persons. 
 There, the section on the dharmas is again a teaching in two parts: teaching the dharmas and teaching the mark of the dharma. From,
“they should not stand in form by way of apprehending something,”
up to
“they should not stand in buddhahood by way of apprehending something,”
is teaching the dharmas.  From 
“Kauśika, they thus should not dwell on the idea of form by way of apprehending something, up to… they thus should not dwell on the idea of buddhahood by way of apprehending something”
is teaching the mark of the true nature of dharmas.
 The section on the true nature of dharmas is again a teaching in three parts: teaching the true nature of dharmas on the side of all-knowing, teaching the true nature of dharmas on the side of the knowledge of path aspects, and teaching the true nature of dharmas on the side of the knowledge of all aspects. 
 Teaching the true nature of dharmas on the side of all-knowing is from
“they should not dwell on the idea that form is permanent… they should not dwell on the idea that form is impermanent,”
up to
“they should not dwell on the idea that the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha is worthy of gifts by way of apprehending something.”
 Teaching the true nature of dharmas on the side of the knowledge of path aspects is from they
“should not stand on the first level… up to the tenth level,”
up to they
“should not dwell on the idea ‘I will establish infinite, countless beings beyond measure in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening’ by way of apprehending something.”
 Teaching the true nature of dharmas on the side of the knowledge of all aspects starts from
“ ‘I will make the five eyes perfect,’ ”
up to
“they should not dwell on the idea ‘I will make the eighty minor signs perfect on the body.’ ”
 Again, construe the section teaching persons in three parts, based on the all-knowledge side and so on. The dharmas where it says,
“I will, standing on the four legs of miraculous power, become completely absorbed in meditative stabilization,”
and so on, are on the side of the level of the knowledge of all aspects. 
 What is the elder Śāriputra thinking where it says,
“Then it occurred to [him] to think, ‘Well then, however could bodhisattva great beings stand in the perfection of wisdom?’ ” 
He was thinking that it has said “they should not stand in all dharmas,” and that it has said it is not possible to stand in emptiness, hence “they should not stand” in it either. How could that be right? 
 Then the elder Subhūti establishes that they do not stand. The teaching that that is standing in the perfection of wisdom is 
“the tathāgatas have totally nonabiding minds.”
It is teaching that they stand in nonabiding nirvāṇa. 
 It has explained the achievement, standing without standing like that, and in the explanation based on those to be trained has said it is inexpressible. So those to be trained come to harbor doubts. Therefore, taking them as its point of departure, it sets the scene for another explanation with,
“O gods, is what is said incomprehensible?”
and so on, asking the gods the question, “Why have you not understood what has been said?” They then reply,
“Incomprehensible, Ārya Subhūti!”
 Then, because the perfection of wisdom is inexpressible, the elder says
“not even one syllable is said here,”
teaching that since this is the case, the apparent talking and apparent hearing are falsely imagined phenomena, like a 
“magical creation… a dream… an echo… and a magical illusion,”
thus making the gods happy.
“A magically created buddha”
is a magically created body of a tathāgata. 
“O gods, form is not deep and is not subtle.”
Because a falsely imagined form is a not real form, it “is not deep and is not subtle.” Again,
“it is because the intrinsic nature of form is not deep and is not subtle,”
and so on, teaches that because the true dharmic nature of form does not, in its intrinsic nature, move, it “is not deep and is not subtle.” So here the section of the text is in two parts: the dharma section and the intrinsic nature section. 
“Well then, in this Dharma teaching has nothing been designated form?”
and so on.  The gods ask: if all dharmas are inexpressible, well then, is nothing “designated” or explained as “form”? Then the elder Subhūti says,
“Exactly so, gods, exactly so,”
teaching that they are indeed not designated and not explained. 
 They
“cannot, without having resorted to this forbearance,”
which is to say, to this explanation of the inexpressible. 
“[Then it occurred to those gods to] think, ‘What would the elder Subhūti accept those listening to the Dharma to be like?’ ”
This is teaching that if they are ultimately inexpressible there will be no speaker and no hearer, so there will be no listening to the Dharma.
“Gods, I would accept those listening to the Dharma to be like illusory beings,”
and so on, teaches that ultimately a speaker and a hearer are nonexistent. 
“Venerable monk Subhūti, who will be the recipients of this perfection of wisdom so deep, so hard to behold,”
and so on—it is “deep” because it is hard to fathom; “hard to behold” because it is not an object of the five collections of consciousnesses; 
“hard to understand”
because it is not an object of thinking-mind consciousness; 
“peaceful”
because all the afflictions and secondary afflictions have calmed down; 
“sublime”
because up to “all suffering” has calmed down;
“subtle”
because all conceptual thought constructions have calmed down; 
“private”
because it is self-reflexive analytic knowledge;
“not an object of speculative thought”
because it transcends the path of thinking;
“brilliant”
because it is the cause for brilliance in the realization of all dharmas as they really are;
“absolutely noble”
because it is the supreme place for the realization of extraordinary dharmas; and
“an object to be known by the learned and wise”
because it is not an object within the range of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and it is not an object to be known by the irreversible bodhisattvas. 
 They
“will be the recipients”—
they will be those who take it up. With 
“persons who have seen the truths, or worthy ones with outflows dried up,”
and so on, it first teaches those who are seeking conventionally. There, in the ultimate sense, bodhisattvas are spoken of as those “who have seen the truths”; when they are awakened, they are called “worthy ones.” Having taught them conventionally, those being taught ultimately are from
“they will not construct the idea that form is empty,”
up to
“so too no being at all will be the recipient of it.”
This teaches that just those who have directly realized the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom are those who are seeking. Ultimately there is nothing they will have sought for, so they are not those who are seeking.
 Then venerable Śāriputra says the assertion that a talker and a hearer are nonexistent contradicts scripture:
“Venerable Subhūti, is it not the case that in this perfection of wisdom the three vehicles… are taught in detail?”
and so on. The explanation of the three vehicles; and the teaching about
“the ten levels… the assistance,”
and 
“the bodhisattva path”
of the perfections and so on; and about these dharmas: birth in the family of a tathāgata, sporting with 
“the clairvoyances,”
hearing, not forgetting, being without distraction, and the sevenfold
“confident readiness,”
and so on—he is saying ‘We ourselves have heard about these.’
 After that, the elder Subhūti, to teach that the explanation of these dharmas is by way of not apprehending anything, to teach they do not exist ultimately and hence that even talking is mere illusion, says,
“Exactly so, Venerable Śāriputra, exactly so,”
and so on. About the reason they are empty, it says
“because of inner emptiness,”
up to
“because of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature,”
and so on. 
 It says the gods worship with flowers to teach the gods the sign of the emergence of the light of transcendental knowledge. This is in order to set the scene for the thought that comes next,
“these flowers have been magically created,”
and so on.
“Kauśika… these flowers have not come about”
is saying that they are not marked as thoroughly established, that they have emptiness as their intrinsic nature, and are not flowers as their intrinsic nature.
“Kauśika, form also has not come about, and what has not come about is not form.”
It says “form also has not come about” because an ultimate form does not have the production of a compounded form. Thus, it says “what has not come about is not form” because an uncompounded phenomenon that has not come about does not have the mark of a falsely imagined form.
“Does not contradict designation and gives instruction in the true nature of dharmas”
means he gives instruction without contradicting the ultimate or the conventional. 
How should bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom?
“Kauśika, bodhisattva great beings, having thus understood how all dharmas are mere designations, should train in the perfection of wisdom.”
This indicates the last of the three earlier questions, “How should a bodhisattva great being train in the perfection of wisdom?”
“Do not train in form,”
and so on—this is saying they train without training, just as, to illustrate, they stand without standing.
 In order to teach that “they do not train in form and so on because they see that form and so on are nonexistent things,” it says
“because they do not see the form in which they train,”
and so on.
“Śatakratu… inquired… why do bodhisattva great beings not see form,”
and so on, and to teach that “they do not see form because it is empty,” it says
“form is empty of form.” 
It says,
“Kauśika, it is because the emptiness of form does not train in the emptiness of form,”
and so on, as the reason they do not train. It means both a training and something that is trained in are nonexistent, so they do not train. 
 Then,
“Kauśika, those who do not train in the emptiness of form… up to those who do not train in the emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects, train in the emptiness of form without making a division into two, up to train in the emptiness of the knowledge of all aspects without making a division into two,”
says that just those who do not train are the ones who train. “Without making a division into two” means they are the same as emptiness, so, when they have trained in the emptiness of a single dharma, they have trained in the emptiness of all. Hence it is explaining that the emptiness of a single dharma is the emptiness of all. 
 Then it says,
“Those who train in the emptiness of form without making a division into two, up to train in the knowledge of all aspects without making a division into two… train in countless, infinite buddhadharmas.”
This is teaching that those who thus train in the emptiness of all dharmas train in the six perfections and so on, up to train in all the buddhadharmas. 
 Then,
“do not train in order to increase or decrease form,”
teaches that training in the perfections and so on, up to the buddhadharmas, is not to increase or decrease form and so on. It means that training is not to increase the bright side or decrease the dark side. 
 Then,
“[do] not train in order to get hold of or get rid of form”
is teaching that where there are thus no dharmas to be increased or decreased, there are no special dharmas to be gotten hold of  and no bad dharmas to be reduced. 
 It says that, and then with
“Venerable Subhūti, why do bodhisattva great beings not train in order to get hold of or get rid of form?”
the elder Śāriputra asks him why, given that bodhisattvas eliminate bad dharmas and obtain special dharmas, there is nothing for them to get hold of or get rid of. After he asks that, the elder Subhūti says
“form does not get hold of form,”
teaching that there are no grasped and grasper. It gives as the reason for that,
“based on… emptiness.” 
“Does not see the production… of form,”
and so on—something plucked out of thin air has no “production.” Something lasting in its nature does not change so there is no
“stopping.”
In suchness there is no production so there is no
“acceptance”
of something not there before. There is no stopping so there is no
“rejection”
of something gotten hold of. There is nothing to get hold of so there is no
“purification”
of something not there before. There is nothing to reject so there is no
“defilement”
to eliminate. Since there is no purification there is no 
“increase,”
and since there is no defilement there is no 
“decrease.”
“Venerable monk… where should you look for the perfection of wisdom?”
He asks about the perfection of wisdom to teach, in regard to the perfection of wisdom itself, the knowledge of path aspects and the knowledge of all aspects.
“In Subhūti’s chapter”—
“Subhūti’s chapter” is all of the intermediate exegesis of the perfection of wisdom. This is saying that the knowledge of all aspects has originated based on the perfection of wisdom, so you should grasp the explanation of it also from there. 
The sustaining power of the tathāgata
 Given that the exegesis of the deep dharmas is within the range of a tathāgata, the chief of the gods does not accept that it is Subhūti’s explanation, so, setting the scene for the noble Subhūti to have given such an exegesis,  he asks,
“Is it through your noble might, is it through your sustaining power…?”
First the elder Subhūti, in conventional mode, teaches that these are
“the Tathāgata’s sustaining power,”
that is, worthy ones give explanations of doctrine through the Tathāgata’s sustaining power. Then the chief of the gods, not accepting that either, says
“Venerable monk Subhūti, given that all dharmas are without anything that sustains them, why do you say ‘this is the Tathāgata’s sustaining power, it is the Tathāgata’s might’?”
Then the elder, having rejoiced in that statement, to teach that in ultimate mode the tathāgata is to be taken as tathatā, with
“the tathāgata cannot be apprehended in the true nature of dharmas that is without anything that sustains it,”
and so on, teaches that there is no dharma called tathāgata at all. There are no false imagined dharmas in the true nature of dharmas, so “in” that “true dharmic nature” of all dharmas “without anything that sustains it” there is no “tathāgata.” And because there are no dharmas unincluded in the true nature of dharmas,
“nor can the tathāgata be apprehended elsewhere than the true nature of dharmas that is without anything that sustains it.”
Because the true nature of dharmas does not abide in falsely imagined phenomena,
“the true nature of dharmas that is without anything that sustains it cannot be apprehended in the tathāgata.”
And because there is no true nature of dharmas elsewhere than dharmas, 
“nor can the true nature of dharmas that is without anything that sustains it be apprehended elsewhere than the tathāgata.”
 Construe the 
“suchness”
section like this, and construe the
“true dharmic nature”
and
“suchness”
of 
“form,”
and so on, ending with
“the knowledge of all aspects”
section like this as well.
“The true dharmic nature of the tathāgata is not conjoined with or disjoined from the true dharmic nature of form. … It is not conjoined with or disjoined from something other than the true dharmic nature of form.”
It says so because they are not different,  they are the same. The alternatives when a basis is conjoined with something on a basis or with something else, or disjoined from them, are that they are acceptable if they are different and not acceptable if they are not. Construe 
“thus, Kauśika, not being conjoined with and not being disjoined from all dharmas—this is its might, this is its sustaining power,”
in the suchness section, in the same way. It is the “might” of emptiness, the “sustaining power” of emptiness, in the sense that the explanation has come about taking emptiness as the point of departure. 
“They also should not look for it in form”— 
it says this because form and so on do not exist— 
“and they should not look for it elsewhere than form.”
It says this because the perfection of wisdom is something that does not exist, so it is not something else either. Therefore, it is teaching that because something does not exist it is not something else. It says
“all dharmas… are not conjoined, are not disjoined… and have… no mark.”
“Form is not the perfection of wisdom”
teaches that both form and the perfection of wisdom are things that do not exist;
“and there is no perfection of wisdom other than form”
means you cannot say it is different, because it is something that does not exist. And so it says,
“Kauśika, it is because all these dharmas do not exist and cannot be apprehended.”
The perfection of wisdom is great, immeasurable, infinite, and limitless
 Then Śatakratu, to teach again that this exposition of the doctrine should be taken to be amazing, makes a fourfold statement that
“The perfection of wisdom… is great… the perfection of wisdom… is immeasurable… the perfection of wisdom… is infinite… [and] the perfection of wisdom… is limitless.”
Connect
“you cannot apprehend a prior limit of form”
with you cannot apprehend at that time “it was there” or “was not there”; 
“you cannot apprehend a later limit”
with at that time “it will be there” or “will not be there”; and
“you cannot apprehend a middle”
with “it is there” or “is not there.” Thus, it is “great” because it is not divided into three time periods.
“You cannot apprehend a measure of form”—
ultimate form is “immeasurable” because you cannot delineate it as “just this much.” It is 
“infinite”
because it cannot be given a size by counting. It is 
“limitless”
because there is no termination of instants. The “prior limit” is production, the “later limit” is cessation, and the “middle” is lasting for an instant. 
 Having thus at first taught that the perfections are unlimited, it then teaches the unlimited in four parts: the unlimited knowledge of all aspects, the unlimited body of dharmas, unlimited suchness, and unlimited beings.
 Among these, what are “unlimited beings”? Their “limits” are the two extremes: the permanent extreme and the annihilation extreme. The nonexistence of those extremes is the state where the extremes are absent, so beings are “unlimited.” Suppose beings existed. In that case they would have limits. But since beings are in their intrinsic nature just nonexistent, unlimited beings with an intrinsic nature do not exist. Suppose a certain being is taught in this explanation of the doctrine. In that case unlimited beings would also be taught. But since it does not teach a being, there are no unlimited beings here either. Therefore, it says,
“Kauśika, where there has been no explanation of anything as a being there will also be no limitlessness of a being.”
This means that because it does not teach a being it therefore also does not teach that beings are unlimited. 
 Then, 
“Kauśika, if a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha remaining for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River were to say the word being again and again,”
and so on, teaches that a statement from the mouth does not make beings unlimited. They are unlimited in their intrinsic nature because they are nonexistent. Suppose beings were made unlimited as a statement in the mouth, that from what the Tathāgata says beings might be born or cease. It means because that is not the case, beings are not unlimited because it has been said they are. 
“Kauśika, from this one of many explanations you should know this perfection of wisdom is unlimited because beings are unlimited.”
This means suppose a being is taught in this explanation, so it exists in reality. Then the two extremes would also exist. But those two are not taught so this perfection is limitless. Because a being is not taught, therefore a being does not exist. Because it does not exist the two extremes do not exist either. Therefore, because it does not teach a being this perfection is unlimited. 
“Without apprehending any dharma… still they make known the presentation of the three vehicles”— 
ultimately and conventionally. 
“But without apprehending the tathāgata as other than the perfection of giving”—
this means the dharma body’s tathāgata is the intrinsic nature of the buddhadharmas. When bodhisattvas train in that, because it is ultimately the intrinsic nature of the buddhadharmas there is also no difference between bodhisattvas and tathāgatas so 
“you… should therefore call them… just tathāgatas.” 
Since bodhisattvas newly practicing the buddhadharmas are the intrinsic nature of the buddhadharmas, because he would teach, 
“the tathāgata… Dīpaṅkara,”
having seen that he was inseparable from the buddhadharmas, prophesied he would be a tathāgata. Thus it gives the example of Dīpaṅkara. 
“Then those gods said to the Lord”—
because the Lord had obtained the prophesy from Dīpaṅkara—
“It is amazing, Lord, this perfection of wisdom of the bodhisattva great beings, through not appropriating and rejecting form,”
up to
“is favorable to getting hold of the knowledge of all aspects.”
This means it is amazing that it assists a “knowledge of all aspects” not there before, even though the two, “getting hold of and rejecting,” do not exist, because a real superior or inferior thing in the dharmas, form and so on, does not exist.
Explanation of Chapters 24 to 33
Beneficial qualities
Then the Lord, knowing the four retinues of monks, nuns,
and so on, takes as its point of departure the Perfection of Wisdom that is being explained. It teaches the beneficial qualities that come about in this life and in later lives from this explanation of the Dharma that up to here has constituted the meaning, and that serves as the cause for an increase of much merit. 
“Emptiness becomes a good sustainable position”
teaches just a concordant cause with emptiness as the sustainable position, which is to say, to them all ordinary things appear as empty, and the self, too, appears as empty. 
 Here it teaches why 
“emptiness finds no way to infiltrate emptiness.”
That
“with which they might infiltrate”
is wicked action. A level or a place of the gods is
“where infiltration might take place.”
That
“into which infiltration might take place”
is a bodhisattva. It is because they are all nonexistent. I will not spell it out  here because the scripture is easy to interpret. 
“Guarding, protection, and safekeeping”—
“guarding” is establishing all physical well-being; “protection” is defending against all external dangers; and “safekeeping” is stopping internal sickness and so on. 
 Here, furthermore, it teaches four benefits: not being infiltrated, not dying an untimely death, not getting scared and so on, and being protected by the gods. 
 Teaching by analogy, with
“to illustrate, … if this… were filled with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas like a thicket of sugarcane,”
and so on, it teaches the greater value.
 This teaches the benefits in this life and the many benefits in future lives. There are the ten, 
“a perfect family”
and so on; they
“magically produce themselves”
and teach the doctrine; they 
“have taken possession of… all the buddhadharmas”; 
calm those who fight and contradict them and so on; the causes of those; perfectly gaining the six perfections; the absence of being disturbed and so on; the analogy of medicine; stopping all nonbright dharmas; protecting and increasing
“wholesome dharmas”;
“polite speech”
and so on; promotion of the ten wholesome actions; promotion of all the buddhadharmas; and 
“training perfectly”
in each of the six perfections.
“Has been made available in order to tame… and in order to lessen their conceit”— 
it is “made available” to 
“bodhisattvas… practicing the ordinary”
practices to fully guide them in the pursuit of the career, and it is also “made available” in order to lessen their conceit when
“without skillful means”
they are conceited. When they pursue the career
“without apprehending”
anything and this perfection of wisdom is completely guiding them, it has been made available in order to fully guide them, and been made available in order to lessen their conceit because they do not become conceited. 
Merits
Then it teaches that it protects from weapons in a battle and the reasons for that; that it protects from external harms and the reasons for that; and that it does not present an opportunity for infiltration. It teaches with the example of the site of awakening; and with
“having borne respectfully in mind this perfection of wisdom written out in book form”
it teaches the qualities of the perfection of wisdom as a collection of statements and collection of letters. It teaches that places come to serve as caityas because of the perfection of wisdom, and it teaches that the worship there of the perfection of wisdom is superior to worship of a caitya filled with the physical remains of a tathāgata and the reasons for that; that there are more beings who are lacking and many fewer who are good and the reasons for that; that in the ten directions there are more beings in the deficient vehicle and the reasons for that; that it is necessary to engage constantly in listening to this explanation and so on; that worshiping it is superior to worshiping 
“a stūpa be made of the seven precious things”;
that there is more merit from that than from worshiping just a
“Jambudvīpa,”
just a
“millionfold world system,”
or just a
“billionfold world system”
full of stūpas; and that there is more merit from worshiping the perfection of wisdom than all beings in all world systems worshiping that many stūpas. Similarly, it teaches there is more merit from worshiping it than if
“each single being of the beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the ten directions”
were to have made a stūpa of the seven precious things and worshiped it, and the reasons for that. It teaches that when the perfection of wisdom is present in the world the cause of the special ordinary and extraordinary good qualities comes about; the entrusting to Śatakratu; and the benefits conveyed using the analogy of the gods and asuras when they
“engage… in battle”
and so on. It gives it the names
“a great knowledge-mantra… an unsurpassable knowledge-mantra… a knowledge-mantra equal to the unequaled,”
and teaches the reasons for those. It is “a great knowledge-mantra” because it has all ordinary and extraordinary attributes and hence is exceedingly great; it is “an unsurpassable knowledge-mantra”  because there is no other above it; and it is “a knowledge-mantra equal to the unequaled” because there is none equal to it. By giving the illustration of 
“the disk of the moon”
it teaches that it serves as the cause of all bright dharmas issuing forth, and it serves as the cause of skillful means. It also teaches
“these good qualities in this very life… poisoning will not cause the time of their death… or fire, weapons, or water… up to sickness”;
and they are not persecuted by retainers of 
“a royal family.” 
It teaches the benefits of these good qualities: they will not be separated from all the bright dharmas; they will not be
“born in the hells, the animal world,”
or as ghosts; they will not 
“have incomplete faculties… missing limbs… [or] be born in”
a low caste; they will have
“a body adorned with the marks”
and signs; and they will take birth in a buddhafield, 
“pass on… to buddhafields… [and] bring beings to maturity and purify a buddhafield,”
and so on. 
 Then it teaches
“religious mendicants… a hundred of them… went back,”
and the reasons for that, and that
“Māra… turned back”;
that all the gods offer worship and praise, and make the commitment to
“guard and protect”;
and that those who take it up will become endowed with the finest wholesome roots. In this context, what emerges from the perfection of wisdom is the knowledge of all aspects.
“Issues forth from… the knowledge of all aspects”
and
“the perfection of wisdom”
teaches that they are different conventionally, and
“the knowledge of all aspects is not one thing and the perfection of wisdom another”
teaches that they are not different ultimately. 
“The knowledge of all aspects issues forth from the perfection of wisdom”
is the practice level;
“the perfection of wisdom issues forth from the knowledge of all aspects” 
is the result level. 
“The knowledge of all aspects is not one thing and the perfection of wisdom another”
 because both constitute the dharma body.
 After that Ānanda speaks, and then, from
“all the buddhadharmas are preceded by the perfection of wisdom,”
up to
“Ānanda, … have been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects in a nondual way,”
it says that when giving has been dedicated to the knowledge of all aspects, at that time, having understood analytically that the perfection of giving and the knowledge of all aspects are not different and not two at the result level, when engaging in giving it 
“gets the name ‘perfection of giving.’ ” 
“Ānanda, by way of the nonduality of form, in a nonappropriating way, in a nonapprehending way”— 
the true dharmic nature of form is “by way of the nonduality of form”; falsely imagined form is “by way of nonapprehending”; and conceptualized form is “by way of nonappropriating.” In 
“that which is nondual cannot be apprehended,”
the nondual is the thoroughly established phenomenon. It is not settled down on as something apprehended and falsely imagined. 
“That which cannot be apprehended is not appropriated”
means that the absence of settling down by way of apprehending is not appropriated by the conceptualization that pays attention to it. 
 Then again it teaches infinite good qualities of the perfection of wisdom: that it serves as the cause of 
“an immeasurable… morality”
and so on, and surpasses the 
“morality… of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas”
and so on. It teaches Śatakratu’s commitment to
“guard, protect, and keep safe”;
the gods connecting with confidence giving a readiness to speak; not being cowed in front of retinues;  not fault-finding; not feeling cowed and so on; being liked by the whole world; the seamless true nature of dharmas; all the gods taking up the perfection of wisdom; the offering of a gift of Dharma to them; the gods guarding; the sign 
“the gods have come”;
the inferior gods withdrawing; belief in the vast; worship of the place; feeling a sense of physical pleasure and so on; having no weariness and so on; having good dreams; 
bodies being infused with energy;
not being greedy for the four requirements; worshiping all the buddhas in world systems all around in the ten directions with the four requirements; there being more merit merely from having respected this perfection of wisdom, even if it has not been taken up and so on, than from having stūpas made of the seven various precious stones and worshiping them; and there being more merit from taking up the perfection of wisdom than were 
“Śatakratu, head of the gods”
to have
“filled this Jambudvīpa right to the top with the physical remains of the tathāgatas,”
and the reasons for that.
 In this context,
“Kauśika, the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended”
because it “cannot be apprehended” with thinking-mind consciousness. It 
“cannot be pointed out”
because it “cannot be pointed out” with words. It 
“does not obstruct”
because, since it is not an object of sense consciousness, it “does not obstruct” as an object does. It 
“has only one mark—that is, no mark”
because it is separated from all imaginary marks. 
“It is not a place to be seized or not seized”
because it is not suitable to be conceptualized as something that can be seized or something that cannot be seized; 
“to be increased or reduced”
because it is not a place for the elimination of things on the dark side or  the increase of things on the bright side; or
“to be taken away from or added to”
because it is not a place for the removal of saṃsāric dharmas or the accomplishment of nirvāṇic dharmas. And why? Because it is without all attachments to such conceptualizations. You should connect it in the same way with them all.
“A dual perfection of wisdom is not available”
means were the perfection of wisdom to be a mode of seizing and not seizing and so on, it would be in a dual state and would be available with a diverse nature, but it is ultimately one, not broken apart, so ultimately such a proliferation of activity is absent from it.
“Similarly, a perfection of giving, a perfection of morality,”
and so on, in the ultimate state are essentially one, and hence 
“are not two,”
because they are not broken apart. Therefore, it says,
“Kauśika… is simply to accept suchness as two,”
and so on. All those perfections of wisdom and so on are one in the form of suchness; they are not there as a duality. 
 It gives the illustration of [the throne]
“in the Sudharmā assembly of gods”
and teaches that the physical remains of all the tathāgatas have come about from this perfection of wisdom.
“The perfection of wisdom has no causal sign” 
because it 
“has no token, is inexpressible,”
and so on, and is therefore separated from all thought constructions. It “has no token” because it is separated from its own defining mark. It “is inexpressible” because it is not within the range of words. It
“cannot be talked about” 
because it is not in the form of language. It 
“is inconceivable”
because it is self-reflexive analytic knowledge.
 After that it teaches that there will be none of the bad forms of life or lesser vehicle aspirations and so on; that there is more merit from taking up this perfection of wisdom than from 
“this billionfold world system filled right to the top with the physical remains  of tathāgatas,”
and the reasons for that; that
“the tathāgata and the perfection of wisdom are not two”;
that for all the buddhas in the ten directions to teach the twelvefold doctrine and to read the perfection of wisdom out loud 
“is equivalent”;
and that worshiping all the tathāgatas of the ten directions and worshiping the perfection of wisdom 
“is equivalent.”
It teaches that those who have taken up the perfection of wisdom and so on stand on the irreversible level; the analogy of 
“a person fearful of rich creditors”; 
that they reach the true nature of dharmas—
“complete nirvāṇa”;
the analogy of 
“the large jewel”;
again, that there is more merit from taking up this perfection of wisdom than from 
“as many… world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River filled right to the top with the physical remains of tathāgatas,”
and the reason for that; and seeing
“the dharma body, the form body, and the knowledge body.”
The “knowledge body” is the knowledge accumulation. 
“What the dharmas actually are when compounded”—
they have transcendental knowledge with conceptualization as their intrinsic nature. 
“What dharmas actually are when they are uncompounded”—
the intrinsic nature that is the inexpressible, the ultimate is what dharmas actually are when they are uncompounded.
“Gives detailed instruction for the three vehicles, and instruction by way of no causal sign, by way of no production, by way of no stopping,”
and so on—it says this intending the nirvāṇa of śrāvakas at the result stage. 
 Ultimately, the perfection of wisdom 
“is not over there or over here, or has stayed up or sunk down,”
and so on. It explains it like this because, again, at the thoroughly established stage such conceptualizations and causal signs do not exist. 
“Replied Śatakratu, “This—that is, the perfection of wisdom—is a great perfection.” 
He says this having thought about  the intrinsic nature of the wisdom that is perfect. The attention that does not apprehend any dharma does not see it, so it is like space because it is a greater object. 
 As for the analogy of the trees, the perfection of wisdom is like the trees; those other than it are like the shadows.
 It teaches that giving to others has a greater result than personal worship.
“Shatters the vajra-like body and imbues the physical remains of the tathāgata with a special power”—
this teaches that what has been shared has a greater result. 
“Who goes to others and explicates”
is teaching the activity of teaching. 
“ ‘What should I rely on and stay by, whom should I respect, revere, honor, and worship?’ ”
is teaching that if even the Tathāgata worshiped this perfection of wisdom, it goes without saying those others than him should. The section of the passage that says,
“Kauśika, those sons of a good family or daughters of a good family who have entered into the Śrāvaka Vehicle or who have entered into the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle,” 
is teaching that the perfection of wisdom is the principal cause and therefore should be worshiped.
 Then there is a section teaching that the result of merit is greater
“from establishing one being in the result of stream enterer, but not so much from establishing the beings in Jambudvīpa in the ten wholesome actions.”
Then, having taught the increase in merit in a further section, teaching that there is more merit from having
“written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it”
than from, up to
“establishing all the beings in Jambudvīpa in the state of a worthy one and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening,”
and taught that the reason for that is that 
“in this perfection of wisdom are taught the dharmas without outflows,”
it teaches that it serves as the cause for the appearance of all ordinary special beings and serves as the cause for the appearance of noble beings. Then there is the section about greater merit from having
“written out this perfection of wisdom in book form and bestowed it”
than from having established all the beings in this four continent world system… thousandfold… millionfold…  a great billionfold world system… or in world systems in the ten directions in the state of a worthy one and a pratyekabuddha’s awakening; the section on the reason for that—that in it are taught dharmas without outflows; the section teaching that it serves as the cause for the appearance of all ordinary special beings and serves as the cause for the appearance of noble beings; and then the teaching on the greater merit, and the teaching that properly paying attention is the main thing. 
“There, properly paying attention is this: taking up… this perfection of wisdom with an understanding that operates without duality.”
This means that engaging “with an understanding” that habitually “operates without duality” is “properly paying attention.”
 Then there is the section on the great increase in merit and the teaching that meaning is principal.
“There the meaning of the perfection of wisdom is this:”
first,
“not viewing the perfection of wisdom as two and not viewing it as not two.”
This means never mind a dualistic nature, there is not even the idea that because it is separated from the conceptualization of all dharmas the nature of the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom is nondual, so the perfection of wisdom is not viewed in a dual way and it is not viewed in a nondual way either. There,
“not viewing the perfection of wisdom as a causal sign or as not a causal sign,”
and so on, teaches the nonexistence of fourteen conceptualizations of fourteen states: being an objective support, the maturation of karma, being a differentiated object of knowledge, transformation of the basis, apprehension of the meaning of true reality, ascending from one level to another level, different levels, practice, paying attention,  elimination, realization, witnessing the true nature of dharmas, meditating on suchness, and nirvāṇa.
 There, it says “not as a causal sign and not as not a causal sign” because, when apprehending an objective support, it does not grasp the falsely imagined causal sign of form and so on, and the idea “there is no causal sign” does not occur. Similarly, it says not
“as brought in or as sent out,”
because it does not conceive of bringing something into existence at the time of the karmic action, and it does not conceive of being sent out in forms of life at the time of the maturation. Similarly, it says not
“as taken away or as added on,”
because, when differentiating dharmas as objects of knowledge, it does not take anything away by over-negating something that exists, and it does not add anything on by over-reifying something that does not exist. Similarly, it says not
“as defilement or as purification,”
because, when in the state of an ordinary person, the tathāgata­garbha is naturally pure, so there is no defilement, and even when there is a transformation of the basis there is no purification not already there before, like space. Similarly, it says not
“as a production or as a cessation,”
because no production or stopping is seen in the true nature of dharmas because all dharmas are not produced and do not stop. Similarly, it says not 
“as grasped or as rejected,”
because, even when ascending from a lower level to a higher level, ultimately it does not grasp a special realization dharma at a higher level and does not reject an inferior realization dharma at a lower level. Similarly, it says not
“as stationed or as not stationed,”
because it does not conceive of having to be stationed on a higher level and it does not conceive of having to be not stationed on a lower level,  because both being stationed and not being stationed are simply just imaginary. Similarly, it says not 
“as true or as mistaken,”
because when engaging in the practice of calm abiding and special insight the ideas “this is correct practice” and “this is not correct practice” do not occur. Similarly, it says not 
“as right or as wrong,”
because, even when zealously paying attention to true reality correctly, the ideas “this attention is produced in the right way,” and “this is produced in the wrong way” do not occur. Similarly, it says not 
“as tiny or as not tiny,”
because, even though, when eliminating the afflictive obscurations and the knowledge obscurations that are the final basis of suffering, the tiny conceptualization of afflictions is eliminated in stages, such an idea does not occur. Similarly, it says not 
“as a part or as not a part,”
because, even when realizing the ultimate in the form of suchness in stages through parts—“in the omnipresent sense, the tip sense, the outflow sense, the neither defilement nor purification sense, the nothing is lacking and nothing added sense” and so on—such an idea does not occur. Similarly, it says not 
“as a dharma or as not a dharma,”
because, even when making the true nature of dharmas manifest and bringing the true nature of dharmas to completion, if there is any idea of something in the form of a dharma or not a dharma the actual stable suchness is not appearing. Similarly, it says not 
“as suchness or as not suchness,”
because even when meditating on suchness the ideas “this is suchness” and “this is something else” do not occur. And similarly,  it says not 
“as the very limit of reality or as not the very limit of reality,”
because even when in nirvāṇa “this is the very limit of reality and this is its opposite” is not grasped. 
 In regard to 
“this is the meaning of nondual,”
it is explained that this “meaning” is counted in one way as what is to be explained and counted in another way as apprehending; and in regard to this “nondual,” that apprehending the meaning to be explained—the perfection of wisdom that has been explained—and the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom is apprehending the meaning of the perfection of wisdom. 
 Then the section on 
“in both the meaning and the letter”
teaches that the merit from explaining this is greater than the merit from personally taking it up.
 Then there is the section about the greater merit from explaining this than from having worshiped
“with all the requirements for happiness, all the buddhas in the ten directions”;
then the section on the merit from explaining this 
“without apprehending anything”
being greater than the merit from practicing the six perfections 
“for infinite, incalculable eons by way of apprehending something”;
and the section on the perfections while apprehending something. 
 There are four sections on the
“counterfeit perfection of wisdom.”
The first is the section teaching cultivation while apprehending something; the second is the section teaching the perfections with results; the third is the section about gaining 
“immeasurable merit”;
and the fourth is the section teaching rejoicing and dedication.
 The sections teaching the perfectly pure perfection of wisdom are also two. The first is the section on the instruction that they should not apprehend anything; the second is the section on not having a view of any dharma and not resting on grasping a view as absolute. 
 Then there are six sections teaching that there is more merit from explaining it to others than the merit from establishing the beings in Jambudvīpa… in the four continents… in a thousandfold… a millionfold… a billionfold world system… or in world systems in the ten directions in the result of stream enterer; similarly, the six sections teach that there is more merit from explaining it to others than the merit from establishing beings 
“in the result of once-returner,”
up to
“a pratyekabuddha’s awakening,”
based on the beings in Jambudvīpa, the four continents and so on; similarly, the six sections teach that there is more merit from explaining it to others than the merit from causing beings to take up
“unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening”
based on the beings in Jambudvīpa, the four continents and so on; similarly, there are also the six sections about those established 
“in the irreversible state”;
and then also the six sections teaching that there is more merit from explaining 
“to one”
for the purpose of speedy clairvoyance than the merit from explaining to those who have been established in the irreversible state. There is then the section where Śatakratu teaches and the section where the elder Subhūti rejoices.
 Those are the subsections of the exposition here. 
Rejoicing and dedication
 Then also in this context of teaching that it is greater merit, having taught that merit from rejoicing is highest, to set the scene for the explanation it says, 
“Then the bodhisattva Maitreya said to the… venerable monk Subhūti,”
and so on. The meaning is this:
“in comparison to the bases of meritorious action arisen from”
rejoicing in the giving, morality, and meditation of all beings, śrāvakas, and pratyekabuddhas, the single merit from rejoicing in and dedicating when it is a bodhisattva who has set out to pay attention to not apprehending anything is 
“the highest.” 
Then Maitreya gives the reason for that, saying,
“Because all the bases of meritorious action arisen from giving,”
and so on, 
“of those… in the Śrāvaka Vehicle and those… in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle are made”
available just
“for personal disciplining… a bodhisattva’s… is for disciplining all beings.”
After he says that, the elder Subhūti takes it in his hands and says: If all the wholesome roots of all the buddhas in the ten directions, gathering a retinue of beings, bringing them to maturity, freeing them, and so on; the five aggregates; all the buddhadharmas; the collection of Dharma teachings; the dharma body that is reached; the wholesome roots of bodhisattvas; and perfect, complete awakening were apprehended and were to come into being, since the wholesome roots from the rejoicing of bodhisattvas has to do with an absence of
“entities and objective supports,”
they would be like the four errors. If anything like those “objective supports” and “entities” existed, in that case, all dharmas—form, feeling, and so on; the thought of awakening, the six perfections, the aggregates, the constituents, the sense bases, and so on; up to
“the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha”—
would also exist like them. But if they, like those objective supports and like those entities, were to be nonexistent, in that case they would all be nonexistent. He is asking how, if that is the case, since the objective supports, entities, wholesome roots, rejoicing, and bases of meritorious action would be nonexistent, would dedication be achieved. He is saying that has to be explained. 
“And if, just like it is with the entities and how it is with the objective supports too, awakening is like that; if thought is like that,” 
means in that case, just as the entities and objective supports are nonexistent, the thought of awakening and so on would be nonexistent too. 
 After he says that, the bodhisattva Maitreya says that there is no objection that they fashion causal signs and make the dedication if they are bodhisattvas who are characterized by having a mature knowledge of emptiness, but the objection is properly directed to those bodhisattvas who are immature, not well trained, and new. Those who have a knowledge of emptiness do not fashion causal signs and make the dedication.
“Venerable monk Subhūti, if those bodhisattva great beings again and again practice the six perfections,”
and so on, teaches that because they are new they do not have faults like the four errors.
 Then,
“Venerable monk Subhūti, you should not give an exposition of this doctrine… like this in the presence of bodhisattvas who have newly set out in the vehicle,”
and so on, teaches that new bodhisattvas are not receptacles for the explanation of this emptiness. If it is explained to them, because they have a
“smidgeon of faith,”
and so on, it teaches that there is the fault that what they have gotten will be spoiled and what they have not gotten will be spoiled too. 
“The explanation… has to be given in the presence of bodhisattvas irreversible…”—
it is not wrong when it is explained to those who are mature.
 Then,
“they will be, venerable monk Subhūti, those whose bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing will be dedicated in that way to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,”
and so on, teaches the ultimate dedication.
 Fashioning causal signs and making the dedication is illogical in four ways: 
there is no connection between the two—the rejoicing thought and the dedicating thought; there is no connection between apprehending the basis, the wholesome root, and the basis of the meritorious action; there is no connection between the two— the dedication and to what the dedication is being made; and there is no dedication. 
“The thought that does the rejoicing and dedication”
of the wholesome roots to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening
“is a thought that is extinguished, stopped, nonexistent, and has run out”
teaches that there is no connection between the two thoughts. 
“And those entities and those objective supports, those wholesome roots, and those bases of meritorious action arisen from rejoicing are extinguished, stopped, nonexistent, and have run out,” 
and so on, teaches that there are no “entities” and so on. 
“Does thought dedicate thought? If thought were to dedicate thought, there would be no coming together of two thoughts” 
teaches that there is no connection between the two—the dedication and to what the dedication is being made.
“The intrinsic nature of thought cannot be dedicated”
teaches that there is no thought making the dedication. It teaches that thought is a construction because of the nonexistence of its intrinsic nature, and nonexistence cannot make a dedication. 
“When bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom thus know the perfection of wisdom is a nonexistent thing,”
and so on, teaches that it is characterized as a nonexistent thing.
“The bodhisattva Maitreya then asked the elder Subhūti, “Venerable monk Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle,”
and so on. He is asking what the rejoicing and dedication of those who have newly set out are. And with
“when bodhisattvas… who have newly set out in the vehicle,”
and so on, Subhūti teaches Maitreya that they have to do it based on training 
“by way of not apprehending anything.”
“And, having heard about those works of Māra from them, no decrease happens and no increase happens,”
because of the absence of constructing those in thought. 
“Grasp the bodhisattva lineage”—
pay attention to suchness. 
 Then, having taught one of the many explanations of rejoicing in general, it sets the scene for the ultimate explanation with,
“Furthermore, Maitreya, bodhisattva great beings who have newly set out in the vehicle should compress together the merit accumulations and the wholesome roots planted by the lord buddhas whose path has come to an end, whose thought constructions and cravings for existence have been cut off,”
and so on. 
 Then Maitreya asks him how do they not go wrong and then the elder Subhūti teaches a section on dedication free of basic immorality, ninefold. 
 There, the first section is that dedication is not wrong based on the absence of the six perceptions, but otherwise it will be wrong.
 The second section is where it says 
“it is a conforming dedication,”
if they contemplate like this: ultimately there is no dedication because thinking about the thought of buddhas and so on, as well as the thought of the dedication, 
“are extinguished”—
even awakening is nonexistent, dharmas are empty of an intrinsic nature, and dedication is nonexistent as well. 
 Then the third is where it says if, having rejoiced in the merits, whatever they may be, of all 
“past, future, and present”
śrāvakas, bodhisattvas, buddhas, and ordinary beings, 
“they rejoice in them and dedicate them, paying attention to their being”
extinguished,
“paying attention to there being no dedication, and paying attention to the”
emptiness of an intrinsic nature, 
“by that dedication they”
dedicate to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.
 Then the fourth is where it says when they 
“are aware that the piling up of”
the merit from dedication is isolated from all dharmas, and all dharmas are isolated from an intrinsic nature, they dedicate with 
“the best, up to the equal to the unequaled dedication.”
 Then the fifth, as before, is where it says that when they rejoice in the wholesome roots and dedicate them, they dedicate while aware that the śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, wholesome roots, dedication, awakening, and the thought doing the dedication are the same in their intrinsic nature. 
 Then the sixth is where it says that when they fashion a causal sign for the wholesome roots and dedicate them, and, by paying attention to past buddhas as past, fashion a causal sign for them and pay attention to them as an object, it becomes wrong, but when
“they do not form a knowledge of and do not give validity to those wholesome roots, those accumulations, or those productions of the thought,”
 they dedicate perfectly. 
 Then the seventh is the section of the dedication that has not been poisoned. This is where the bodhisattva Maitreya, thinking how is it possible that the two—not fashioning a causal sign and dedication—are not a contradiction, asks the elder Subhūti, who then teaches that it is when the dedication is made by 
“bodhisattvas who are skilled.”
Then the bodhisattva Maitreya teaches that bodhisattvas who want to make a perfect dedication 
“should reflect deeply as follows: … those buddhas, those wholesome roots, those accumulations, and those… thoughts”
do not exist; nevertheless, look how having fashioned causal signs I construct them all in my mind. Tathāgatas do not permit such a dedication where, having fashioned such causal signs, they conceptualize them. It is similar to a delicacy that has been poisoned. So such a dedication should not be made, and training should not be done in that. Therefore, having taken the Buddha alone as authority, they make a dedication, thinking, “I shall dedicate those wholesome roots just as the lord buddhas  understand them.”
 Then the eighth is where it says dedication while paying attention to all dharmas that do not belong to the three realms and three time periods 
“has not been poisoned.”
Dedication other than that 
“has been poisoned.”
 And then the ninth is where it says
“I too must dedicate… in this truly dharmic way,”
which is the domain of the transcendental knowledge of the buddhas.
 Then the Lord, having rejoiced in many ways in those statements, gives a threefold teaching about greatly increasing merit.
 The first is
“this dedication… without attachment creates even more merit than”
the merit 
“if all the beings that are in the billionfold world system were to obtain the ten wholesome actions… the concentrations, … the immeasurables, … the absorptions, and… the clairvoyances.”
 The second is that one has even more than the merit created from having served those beings if they
“were to become stream enterers,”
and so on, up to
“worthy ones and pratyekabuddhas,” 
with the four necessities for as long as they live.
And the third is, were all those beings to have become bodhisattvas, just that same one has even more than the masses of merit such as those created by all the beings in the ten directions were they to have served each of them with the four necessities and
“with all the requirements for happiness… for as many eons as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River.”
“Lord, if that basis of meritorious action had a physical form it would not fit in even as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River”
means all of it would not fit there.
 Then there is a section on earlier merits being inferior  because they have the perception of a causal sign and
“a perception that apprehends something,”
and masses of dedication merits being greater than them because they do not exist.
 Then there are two sections where all the chiefs of the gods and gods living in the desire realm, and all the Brahmās in the higher realms, have worshiped and raised their voices in praise, and then the section teaching that the merit of a single bodhisattva who dedicates while not apprehending anything is much greater than the merit from the dedication by way of apprehending something by 
“all the beings in a billionfold world system”
who have become bodhisattvas.
 The first rejoicing is
“without grasping, without rejecting, without falsely projecting, without acquiring, and without apprehending,”
which teaches the sameness of those buddhas and those wholesome roots based on the fact that there is no worse or better in suchness. Similarly, because 
“there is no production, cessation, defilement, purification,”
and so on,
“I also rejoice,”
just like those buddhas, śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and ordinary beings, and the wholesome roots, and the dedicating thought that all abide in suchness.
 Then the second is also rejoicing while understanding analytically that all dharmas are comparable to
“liberation,”
which is to say, all dharmas are the same because they are comparable to that; because all dharmas are isolated from an intrinsic nature, so earlier at the stage of ordinary beings they
“are not bound, are not freed”;
because all dharmas that are pure in their basic nature 
“are not defiled”
earlier and 
“are not purified”
later;
because all dharmas that are primordially calm 
“are not produced”
through the power of earlier causes and conditions; because they have no intrinsic nature, 
“do not appear,”
and later 
“do not stop… have not changed places,  and have not been destroyed”—
thus all dharmas are the same because 
“they are not bound, are not freed, are not defiled, and are not purified, … are not produced, do not appear, and do not stop, have not changed places, and have not been destroyed.”
 Then there is the section teaching that the merit from dedicating the aggregates of morality from 
“practicing the perfections… by way of not apprehending anything”
is greater than merit accumulated from having served all the buddhas in the ten directions with all the requirements for happiness and by practicing the six perfections together with apprehending something.
 These are the sections of the text on rejoicing.
Explanation of Chapters 34 to 36 
Wheel of the Dharma and the perfection of wisdom
 Then Śāriputra, feeling faith after having heard about the vast merit from rejoicing in, and dedication of, such worship and reciting of the perfection of wisdom, and from giving and so on, begins with seventeen statements in praise of this perfection of wisdom, to generate faith in others in the retinue. 
“Turning the wheel of the Dharma that has twelve aspects three times”—
the Lord turned “the wheel of the Dharma” of the four truths “that has twelve aspects three times.” There he turns it three times: One is: “These are the four truths.” It is the part of the speech stating the intrinsic nature of the four truths. The second turning is the part of the speech stating that just those four truths have to be comprehended, eliminated, realized, and cultivated. The third turning is the part of the speech stating that “I have comprehended, eliminated, realized, and cultivated” just those four truths. Those are the turning three times.
 For the truth of suffering  there are three aspects: the intrinsic nature of suffering, that it has to be comprehended, and that “I have comprehended.” For the truth of origination there are three aspects: the intrinsic nature of origination, that it has to be eliminated, and that “I have eliminated it.” For the truth of cessation there are three aspects: the intrinsic nature of cessation, that it has to be realized, and that “I have realized it.” And for the truth of the path there are three aspects: the intrinsic nature of the path, that it has to be cultivated, and that “I have cultivated it.” Thus, there are twelve aspects. 
“Lord, how does one stand in the perfection of wisdom?”
Śatakratu has already asked earlier about the way to stand in the perfection of wisdom, and it has already been explained, so this is not a question about the way to stand in the perfection of wisdom. Here “how does one stand” means this: how, by respecting and serving it, does one stand?
“The perfection of wisdom is itself the Teacher and the Teacher is himself the perfection of wisdom.”
Because it does the work of the Buddha it is envisioned and taught to be not different. 
 Śatakratu wonders,
“What occasioned this inquiry by the venerable monk Śāriputra? What was the catalyst?”
because he is not satisfied with just those reasons Śāriputra has given. So then Śāriputra says 
“assisted by the perfection of wisdom”
and so on. It teaches that this perfection of wisdom is principal. It teaches that even though all the perfections other than that are causes of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, they are governed by it, so it should be greatly respected. 
“Dedicate”
them all
“to the knowledge of all aspects”
by rejoicing in them. 
“When the five perfections are assisted by the perfection of giving, they do not get the name perfection.”
It says this because it taught earlier that all six are lodged one in the other and work as a single cause. 
“It is not so, Kauśika, it is not so”
is teaching that when you complete one of the six perfections, all six are completed, so they are reciprocally one and just simply one cause, but, unlike the perfection of wisdom that is the nature of them all, they are not therefore the cause in all respects.
“Lord, how should [they]… find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom?”
Here too it is not asking how they find and produce the perfection of wisdom within themselves, it is asking what the result of finding and producing the perfection of wisdom within themselves is.
“So they do not find and produce within themselves form”
means: so form is a nonexistent thing.
“Lord, how do they find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom so that they do not find and produce within themselves form?”
This is the second question Śāriputra asks the Lord. It means: in what form within themselves should the perfection of wisdom be found and produced so that the nonexistence of form and so on is feasible?
“Śāriputra, they should find and produce within themselves the perfection of wisdom as the nonenactment, the nonproduction, the noncessation, the nonappearance, the nondestruction, and the nonapprehension of form.”
In the context of a thoroughly established phenomenon there is no “enactment” of falsely imagined form. There is neither “production nor cessation” from the perspective of a continuum. In each instant there is neither “appearance nor nondestruction.” And there is no “apprehension” because in all respects there is no production. It
“does not cause any dharma to be gained.”
At that time there are not any dharmas at all. 
“It is counted as the perfection of wisdom.”
The nonconceptual effortless wisdom that has gone to the other side of the nonexistence of all dharmas is the “perfection of wisdom.” 
“The perfection of wisdom… does not cause even the knowledge of all aspects to be gained. It does not apprehend it.”
In the context of the dharma body, just that is the perfection of wisdom, just that is the knowledge of all aspects. It does not apprehend that “the knowledge of all aspects is one thing and the perfection of wisdom another.”
“Kauśika… it is because the perfection of wisdom does not cause it to be gained as a name, as a causal sign, or as something to be enacted.”
The true nature of dharmas is nonconceptual. The perfection of wisdom does not grasp any dharma at all through a name, causal sign, or enactment, so the knowledge of all aspects cannot be apprehended through that name, that causal sign, or that enactment.
“Well then, Lord, how does this perfection of wisdom cause it to be gained?”
Insofar as the perfection of wisdom does cause the knowledge of all aspects to be gained conventionally, how does it cause it to be gained?
“The perfection of wisdom causes it to be gained without apprehending, without asserting, without being stationed on, without forsaking, without settling down on, without grasping, and without rejecting anything at all, but it does not cause any dharma to be gained.”
When apprehended and apprehender have become the same thing in the same form, this wisdom does not “apprehend” that this is a dharma I have to grasp; does not “assert” that I myself am the grasper; does not see, as does the eye and so on, as something “stationed”; does not see any defiling conceptualization that has to be “forsaken”;  does not “settle down” even slightly on “this is true” as being in the nature of truth; and does not “grasp or reject” because it does not see what is grasped and has to be joined with in the form of bright and dark sides. At that time, because it itself is the entity of the knowledge of all aspects, it is also said that “it causes the knowledge of all aspects to be gained.”
“It is amazing, Lord, … this perfection of wisdom…”
Because all dharmas do not exist, they are not produced, do not cease, do not occasion anything, are not apprehended, and are not destroyed in that context, it is explained with the names 
“nonproduction”
and so on.
 It says if they
“have such ideas as ‘the perfection of wisdom causes all dharmas to be gained’ or ‘the perfection of wisdom does not cause all dharmas to be gained,’… the perfection of wisdom is forsaken,”
because both an existent thing and a nonexistent thing are thought constructions. 
“I do not have confidence in form.”
This means the Lord has confidence in and comprehends form that is marked as a nonexistent thing. Construe the others similarly.
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom gives me confidence because form cannot be apprehended,”
and so on, means that having comprehended all dharmas, form and so on, as the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, the Lord has “confidence in”—that is, has a directly realization of—the perfection of wisdom.
“Does not make form bigger nor does not make it smaller”—
it does not make the form of the true nature of dharmas that is thoroughly established bigger and it does not make falsely imagined form smaller. Construe them all similarly.
“Those bodhisattva great beings with such notions, Lord, are not practicing the  the perfection of wisdom.”
Were this perfection of wisdom to do anything, in that case it might be right to say ‘this perfection of wisdom does not do anything,’ but because this perfection of wisdom is beyond every false imagination it does not do anything at all. Therefore it is not right to say that “the perfection of wisdom does not make form bigger and does not make form smaller” and so on. 
“Lord… because… they are not in harmony with the perfection of wisdom as cause”
means that because all dharmas remain in their intrinsic nature, in their own basic nature as it really is, there is nothing there in harmony with the perfection of wisdom as cause. 
 Now it again teaches that even the perfection of wisdom is like form and so on, in twelve rounds of teaching beginning with
“because beings are not produced.”
You should view the perfection of wisdom as marked by nonproduction because a being is marked by not arising. 
 There, “because beings are not produced,” up to
“because one who sees is not produced,”
intends the selflessness of persons. From
“because form is not produced, up to… because a buddha is not produced,”
intends the selflessness of dharmas. 
“There is no full awakening”
of form and so on. There is no realization of them.
“Because beings are not endowed with the powers,”
they are weak or do not have the power of wisdom.
Not bound and not freed
“Because dharmas are in an inanimate material state”
means because all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. 
 The elder Śāriputra, having heard that this perfection is thus in its nature big and vast, feels faith, and for the bodhisattvas poses four questions about the death and birth of bodhisattvas, the amount of time since they have set out,  the number of tathāgatas they have attended on, and the amount of time they have been practitioners of the perfections. That same part of the text sets the scene for an account of what happens to those forsaking the good Dharma, and that same part of the text also sets the scene for it being 
“hard… to believe in this perfection of wisdom.”
Then, because it has taught it is hard to believe in, Subhūti asks the question, 
“Just how deep, Lord, is this perfection of wisdom in which it is so hard for them to believe?”
The Lord explains that it
“is not bound and it is not freed,”
explains about 
“purity,”
explains about
“the unlimited,”
and explains about
“those who are attached and not attached.”
Thus, it sets the scene for a fourfold explanation.
 Among these, 
“Subhūti… form is not bound and it is not freed.”
During the period of the cycle of existences, that which is the appearance of the thoroughly established true dharmic nature of form “is not bound,” because, for the entire duration it is not bound by all the bonds of affliction, karma, and maturation, and later during the period of the thoroughly established phenomenon it “is not freed” because freedom does not exist, so being “bound and freed” is said of just a falsely imagined state, not of the true dharmic nature of form that, like space, is not tainted by anything at all. Therefore, it says 
“because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in form is form.”
This means falsely imagined form, the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, is the true dharmic nature of form. You should construe all dharmas, up to the knowledge of all aspects, like this as well. 
 Again, to elucidate just that, that it is not bound and is not freed, there is an explanation in tandem with the three time periods:
“Subhūti, the prior limit of form is not bound and is not freed.”
The “prior limit” is the true dharmic nature of form in the cycle of existences during the period when there are stains and impurity.  The 
“present”
describes the present period during which there is purity and impurity. 
“The later limit”
describes the future period when there is purity. 
“Because the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature in the prior limit is form”
teaches that what is marked as abiding without change in all three time periods is suchness, indicating that the true nature of dharmas does not have the mark of being freed over time. 
Purity
 Having thus taught, through the explanation of not being bound and not being freed, that saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are nonexistent things, again, to teach that defilement and purification do not exist it begins the explanation of purity with
“that purity of form is the purity of the result.”
There the dharmas from form, up to, finally, the knowledge of all aspects, have no bonds so there is no defilement. Because there is no defilement they are pure in their intrinsic nature, and because they are pure in their intrinsic nature there are no purification dharmas either. Ultimately purification dharmas do not do anything at all to natural purity. So, even though defilement and purification are impossible, foolish beings construct them. They are not thoroughly established. 
 Thus, having taught in one way that it is hard to believe, it again teaches it is hard to believe because of purity. There, “just that purity of form is the purity of the result” means there is nothing other than purity that results from the purification dharmas—the perfections, the dharmas on the side of awakening, and so on. The true dharmic nature of form, the constantly abiding purity in the form of the thoroughly established nature, just that is purity in the form of the result. 
 You should construe all the dharmas like this as well. 
 Having thus  taught the intrinsic nature of purity, then it teaches that the purity of all dharmas is also one, not broken apart:
“That purity of form is the purity of the result. That purity of the result is the purity of the perfection of wisdom. That purity of the perfection of wisdom is the purity of form.”
There, the true dharmic nature of the form state is called “the purity of form.” The very limit of reality called the “nirvāṇa” state is called “the purity of the result.” The dharma body state is called “the purity of the perfection of wisdom.” The meaning there is that the suchness that is the purity of form is the purity of the result, that is, is freed; just that freedom is the purity of the perfection of wisdom, that is, is the dharma body; and just that dharma body is the purity of form, that is, is suchness. Hence suchness, freedom, and the dharma body are ultimately not broken apart.
 You should construe up to the purity of the knowledge of all aspects like this as well. 
 Summing up in conclusion it teaches that the purity of all dharmas is one. Therefore, those purities from the purity of form, the purity of the result, and the purity of the perfection of wisdom, up to the knowledge of all aspects, are
“not two, not divided, not separate, and not broken apart.”
They are “not two” because they are the same; they are “not divided” because you cannot divide them into different things; they are “not separate” because a particular one does not exist; they are “not broken apart” because nothing obstructs them, or, because they are constant. 
 Thus, it has taught the purity of the result  shared in common with śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. Now, to teach the uncommon purity of bodhisattvas it leaves out the result, and it teaches having taken up only the purity of the perfection of wisdom.
 Thus, these two passages teach that the purity of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and the purity of the tathāgata, are “one.” 
 Now it teaches the purity in a sequence of three connected sections: the purity that is the nonexistence of a self of persons, the purity that is the nonexistence of secondary afflictions, and the purity that is the nonexistence of a self in dharmas.
“Because of the purity of self, there is the purity of form.”
The knowledge that a self is a nonexistent thing is the purity of self. There it should be taught in the order of the sections of the text. It teaches that
“because of the purity of self, there is the purity of form.”
Because of the purity of form there is the purity of self. Thus, this purity of self and purity of form are not two, are not divided, are not separate, and are not broken apart. 
Similarly, 
“because of the purity of self, there is the purity of feeling… perception… volitional factors… and consciousness. Because of the purity of consciousness, there is the purity of self,”
and so on, and that
“the purity of self and purity of”
all dharmas, up to, finally, 
“the purity of the knowledge of all aspects”
is not two.
 Then, in the section on the purity that is the nonexistence of secondary afflictions, 
“because of the purity of greed there is the purity of form; because of the purity of form there is the purity of greed. Thus, this purity of greed and the purity of form is not two,”
and so on, again explains that the purity of dharmas, up to, finally, the knowledge of all aspects,  and the purity of greed 
“is not two.”
Similarly connect this with 
“hatred, and confusion.”
 Then, in the section on the purity that is the nonexistence of a self of dharmas, having taken up the purity of dharmas, the dependent originations, and so on, up to, finally, the knowledge of all aspects, there is the section explaining that the purity of two dharmas is not two:
“Because of the purity of ignorance there is the purity of volitional factors; because of the purity of volitional factors there is the purity of ignorance. Thus, this purity of ignorance and the purity of volitional factors is not two,”
and so on. So too with the perfections as well, it says,
“Because of the purity of the perfection of giving there is the purity of the perfection of morality; because of the purity of the perfection of morality there is the purity of the perfection of giving. Thus, this purity of the perfection of giving and the purity of the perfection of morality is not two,”
and so on. All have to be construed in the same way as well. Thus, you should construe
“because of the purity of the knowledge of the path aspects there is the purity of the knowledge of all aspects, because of the purity of the knowledge of all aspects there is the purity of the knowledge of all path aspects. Thus, this purity of the knowledge of the path aspects and the purity of the knowledge of all aspects is not two,”
and so on. 
 Then, also in the section gathering the purity of all dharmas together, first, having taken up among the six perfections the purity of the perfection of wisdom, and the purity of the aggregates and so on, up to, finally, the six collections of feelings, and the purity of the knowledge of all aspects, there is the section teaching that it is not two: 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, that purity  of the perfection of wisdom is the purity of form. That purity of form is the purity of the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of the perfection of wisdom, purity of form, and purity of the knowledge of all aspects is not two, not divided, not separate, and not broken apart.”
Similarly connect this with
“feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness,”
up to
“that purity of the perfection of wisdom is the purity of the feeling that arises from the condition of contact with the thinking mind. The purity of the feeling that arises from the condition of contact with the thinking mind is the purity of the knowledge of all aspects. Thus, this purity of the perfection of wisdom, purity of the feeling that arises from the condition of contact with the thinking mind, and purity of the knowledge of all aspects is not two,”
and so on. Then also, having taken up the purity of the dharmas—from the perfection of concentration up to the aggregates and so on, and finally the feelings—and 
“the purity of the knowledge of all aspects,”
it teaches that it is not two; and similarly it teaches that the purity of the dharmas—all the perfections, all the emptinesses, up to, finally, the feelings—and 
“the purity of the knowledge of all aspects is not two”;
and, similarly, it explains that (1) the purity of the dharmas, the applications of mindfulness, and so on, up to, finally, all-knowledge; and (2) the purity of the dharmas form and so on, up to, finally, the six collections of feelings; and (3) the purity of the knowledge of all aspects is one.
Then it teaches the section on 
“the purity of the compounded”
and 
“the uncompounded,” 
and the section on the purity of the three time periods.
 The elder Śāriputra, having listened to the exposition of purity up to here, because a retinue is gathered together, musters the confidence to speak and says,
“Lord, this purity is deep,”
and so on. With this begins a sequence of thirteen statements about purity.
“Śāriputra, it is deep because it is extremely pure”
says that the true nature of dharmas that is not broken apart from those saṃsāric dharmas, composed of the stains of the many afflictions, secondary afflictions, and conceptualizations, does not become stained by those stains. It is extremely pure at all times, so it is hard for fools to feel confidence in it. Hence it is called “deep because it is extremely pure.” 
“Śāriputra, purity is light because it is extremely pure,”
To illustrate, the sun and moon and so on are extremely pure, that is, they shine brightly where there are no clouds, fog, haze and so on. Similarly, the true dharmic nature of form and so on is called “light because it is extremely pure,” so it says “purity is light because form is extremely pure.”
“Lord, purity does not link up.”
Because the stains of the proliferation of afflictions and conceptualizations have stopped there is no further linking up, so, because it is stainless and pure, it is said that it “does not link up.” 
“Śāriputra, form does not link up because it does not change places, so it is pure”
means because falsely imagined form and so on that have been abandoned do not change places again, they have stopped. 
“Lord, purity is without defilement”
is saying that even though there have been clouds, fog, haze and so on, like space, in its basic nature it is thoroughly clean. 
“Lord, there is no obtaining and no clear realization of purity.”
Were the two dharmas—something obtained and a cause of obtaining—to exist, there would be an “obtaining”; were the two dharmas—something clearly realized and a cause of clear realization—to exist, there would be a “clear realization.” But because the mere nonexistence of false imagining and conceptualizing is posited as the “purity” that is the thoroughly established true nature of dharmas, “obtaining” and “clear realization” do not exist in that purity at all. 
“Lord, purity does not come into being.”
“Purity” is posited as the dharmas, falsely imagined and conceptualized form and so on, not coming into being, so it is “marked by not coming into being.” 
“Lord, purity does not arise in the desire realm… the form realm… [or] the formless realm.”
The desire, form, and formless realms are falsely imagined. When not arising and appearing in them it is called “purity,” so it says
“because you cannot apprehend the desire realm’s intrinsic nature.”
“Lord, purity does not know”
means the self is not the intrinsic nature self-awareness. 
“Because dharmas are inanimate material”—
it is saying “dharmas are inanimate material” because they are free from conceptual consciousness. 
“Lord, purity does not know form.”
This means it also does not see all dharmas, form and so on.
“Because it is empty of its own mark” 
means things like form and so on are without defining marks. This “does not know” teaches that purity is the mark of the absence of conceptualization. This “purity  does not know form” teaches that dharmas are the mark of nonexistence. The two teach the mark of the nonexistence of apprehended object and apprehending subject. 
“Lord, the perfection of wisdom does not help nor does it hinder the knowledge of all aspects,”
because both, marked by suchness, are 
“extremely pure.”
Suchness does not help and does not hinder suchness, just like space does not help and does not hinder space. Therefore, it says
“because of the establishment of the dharma-constituent.”
This is teaching that nobody helps or hinders the dharma body, given that at all times it is marked by staying in the same state.
“Lord, the purity that is the perfection of wisdom does not assist any dharma,”
because the extremely pure perfection of wisdom is the mark of not taking hold of anything. Were it to take hold of any dharma it would not be pure.
Then the statements by the elder Subhūti,
“Lord, form is pure because self is pure”
and so on, mean that because the self is something that is nonexistent, form and so on are things that do not exist either, because here you have to take “purity” as something that does not exist. Hence, it says 
“because it is extremely pure, Subhūti.”
Earlier it was teaching the pure perfection of wisdom, now it is teaching the purity of selflessness. 
“Because knowledge is not found and is not discarded, Subhūti.”
They do not obtain or find a transcendent knowledge that was not there before, and a transcendent knowledge that is found is also not lost, so, because there are neither, there is not even awakening. Even “awakening” is falsely imagined. 
“Nonduality  and purity”—
because the two—defilement and purification—do not exist, it is pure in its intrinsic nature even before, so like space it has no defilement. And even at the period of the final outcome, it is like space that has no purity that was not there before. 
Having thus completed the explanation of purity, it begins the explanation of the unlimited to inculcate belief in the deep, with
“because form is unlimited.”
It is “unlimited” because it is not permanent and not annihilated, and is not at the prior limit, later limit, or in the middle. Therefore, it says 
“because of the emptiness of what transcends limits and the emptiness of no beginning and no end, Subhūti.”
Why does the elder Subhūti ask,
“Lord, why is such a realization as that the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings?” 
He is asking why, if the perfection of wisdom is so deep a topic as that, is it just an object of bodhisattvas, not of buddhas. It says,
“Because it is the knowledge of path aspects, Subhūti.”
Thus, this perfection of wisdom is not the final one, is not when the work is done. It is an aspect of the path of the knowledge of all aspects, hence it is “just of bodhisattvas.”
“Lord, you cannot apprehend the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattva great beings on this side, on the farther side, or on neither.”
What does this intend? You can suppose “perfection” (pāramitā) is on the way to the other side (para), has arrived at the other side, or is the essential nature of the other side. It says this because, even when taken to be the perfection of wisdom of bodhisattvas,  it is not positioned on this side, it is not positioned on the farther side, and cannot be apprehended on some other that is not included in those sides. “This side” incorporates the compounded; “the farther side” incorporates the uncompounded.
 After saying that,
“Because it is extremely pure,” said the Lord.
Were any side to be apprehended, then, in that case, it would not be purity. This means it is extremely pure because there are none, and, because it is extremely pure, it is not positioned on either side or anywhere else either. 
“Because of the sameness of the three time periods, Subhūti”—
this means that with the comprehension of the sameness of the three time periods, because of the emptiness of no beginning and no end, there is no notion of this side and no notion of a farther side, and hence “it does not stand on this side and it also does not stand on the farther side.”
Attachment and nonattachment
In order to build trust that the perfection of wisdom is deep, it then again sets the scene for the explanation of attachment and nonattachment from the perspective of practices that apprehend and do not apprehend, with
“they are attached to a name and attached to a causal sign,”
and so on. Seizing on a dharma, form and so on, as a word is falsely imagining. Seizing on a causal sign as a conventional term is conceptualizing. Both are obscurations, so they are “attachment.”
“Subhūti, even though all dharmas are without causal signs and without names”
is teaching that they are within the range of the perfection of wisdom. 
“Lord, such an excellent exposition and excellent definitive teaching of this perfection of wisdom… to bodhisattva great beings is amazing”—
this is teaching of the knowledge of path aspects.
“When… they perceive that form is ‘empty,’ they are attached”
 is thinking like that by way of apprehending something. 
“Not perceive form as ‘form’ ”—
this is the bodhisattva’s knowledge of path aspects. 
“Not perceive… dharmas as… ‘dharmas’ ”—
they do not appear.
“Kauśika, it is because the basic nature of form cannot be dedicated”
means dharmas should not be dedicated to awakening by way of apprehending something, because they stay in the same state and do not undergo transformation.
“Subhūti, I will teach you other sorts of attachment even more subtle than those”
that obscure the knowledge of path aspects. 
“Lord, the perfection of wisdom is deep.”
Earlier, to build trust, the elder Śāriputra set the scene for the explanation of the perfection of wisdom being deep, and for it being hard to believe in. Now, to demonstrate that he himself has comprehended that it is deep, the elder Subhūti says, “Lord, … [it] is deep.” 
“Subhūti, it is because all dharmas are isolated in their basic nature.”
Thus all phenomena are always deserted by all attachments, are deserted by a basic nature, are isolated in their basic nature. But falsely imagined attachment is still apprehending, and even though falsely imagined attachment is apprehending, still all dharmas are untainted, that is, are isolated in their intrinsic nature so they are deep. 
“The perfection of wisdom… is unmade and does not cause anything to come into being.”
In it there is nothing to be established and nothing is caused to come into being because it is the intrinsic nature of the dharma body. 
“The basic nature of a dharma is not two; it is simply one.”
As the intrinsic nature that is suchness, all dharmas are a single entity, but still they appear with different identities. This is difficult to clearly realize. Because suchness is the intrinsic nature of all dharmas  it is called their “basic nature.” That suchness, moreover, is not the cause of any other true nature of dharmas, so it
“is not a basic nature.”
This suchness is uncompounded; it is not made by anybody, so it
“is unmade.”
Just that 
“has not caused anything to come into being”
because no enactment of merit or demerit whatsoever has occasioned it.
“Nobody has seen, heard, thought about, been conscious of, or fully awakened to the perfection of wisdom,”
because the perfection of wisdom is not the object of seeing consciousness and so on, nor of thought constructions such as those, because an apprehender and an apprehended object are the same in their intrinsic nature.
“The perfection of wisdom is inconceivable”
means you cannot conceive of it through another dharma, like fire indicated by smoke. Therefore, it says
“it is not known through form”
and so on. It
“is the nonapprehender of all dharmas.”
It makes all dharmas known as the mark of what cannot be apprehended. 
Explanation of Chapters 37 and 38
“How do [they]… practice the perfection of wisdom?”
that is, the knowledge of path aspects. 
 The section of the text to teach that if those conscious of a basic nature practice all dharmas they do not practice the perfection of wisdom is
“if they do not practice form,”
and so on. The second section is to teach that when those conscious of special insight practice the marks of dharmas, they do not practice the perfection of wisdom.
 It says,
“ ‘form is completed’ or ‘not completed,’ ”
intending when meditation is completed.
“ ‘Form is not attached’ ”
is the unobstructed true dharmic nature of form. When they practice like that
“they do not perceive ‘form is not attached.’ ”
This means that if, when practicing, they have set out like that, then when they awaken to the knowledge of all aspects they will have a realization like that. 
Benefits of purity
 Subhūti’s  statement that he is amazed, the statement of some monk or other, the statement by Śatakratu, and the statement that guarding, protecting, and keeping safe are not possible are all alike.
“They do not falsely project form”
as a functioning thing that is real and a defining mark and so on; 
“do not falsely project form as ‘mine’ ”
as a real thing, like a master’s servant;
“do not falsely project anything onto form”
as a real thing on a foundation or basis; and
“do not falsely project a causal sign of form”
as a basis of a designation that is a conventional term.
 The description of 
“the thousand buddhas”
is because those thousand buddhas cause faith to arise in that perfection of wisdom. 
The question about 
“Maitreya”
teaching the Dharma is to make it known that during the three periods of time the explanations are of just this perfection of wisdom. 
Then,
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is pure because form is pure.”
The dharmas, form and so on, that have been apprehended are stainless, so the knowledge of path aspects is also pure. 
“Subhūti, form… is unproduced and unceasing, without defilement and without purification.”
When form abides in its intrinsic nature—the true nature of dharmas—and does not appear as produced, ceasing, defiled, or purified, that
“form is pure,”
not otherwise.
“Because space is pure”—
this is teaching that just as space does not become impure even if there are clouds and haze because it is pure in its nature, so too with the perfection of wisdom. The six—
“pure… untainted… cannot be grasped… does not say anything… does not converse about anything… cannot be apprehended”—
teach that it is comparable to space.
“Because space does not say anything”— 
even though in space something other than that space says something, in space nothing is said and there is no conversation,
“just like the two sounds of an echo, as an analogy,”
reverberate in space, but it is not suitable to say that space says something.
“Because space does not converse about anything”
means that because of its intrinsic nature there is no conversation in space. Alternatively, “saying something” is mere sound; “conversing” is naming. 
“Subhūti, … because form is extremely pure, cannot be apprehended, is unproduced and unceasing, and without defilement and without purification”—
when this perfection of wisdom sees all dharmas, it sees the “pure” aspect of form and so on because the stains of falsely imagined afflictions and conceptualizations constructed in thought do not exist; the aspect that “cannot be apprehended” because it is separated from all apprehending; the “unproduced and unceasing” aspects because it is a thoroughly established phenomenon; and the aspects “without defilement and without purification” because it is isolated from an intrinsic nature. At that point it is called 
“pure”
in its nature. 
 Having thus taught that the perfection of wisdom is extremely pure, then, to engender faith in it, they
“will not contract diseases of the eye,”
and so on, teaches its benefits in the here and now and in future lives.
“In the perfection of wisdom there is no dharma that is produced or ceases, is defiled or purified, or is appropriated or rejected at all” 
teaches that production, cessation, and so on do not appear in the perfection of wisdom.
“Thus, do not form a notion, and thus do not conceive”—
they do not even conceive of the perfection of wisdom as such
“a great jewel” 
endowed with those good qualities. 
“Subhūti, this perfection of wisdom does not establish any dharma, or teach it.”
All dharmas are thoroughly established phenomena that do not alter, so at the time they are thoroughly established phenomena this perfection of wisdom appears like that, which is to say, there is no false projection of having to establish any special dharma; there is no false projection of taking hold of or bestowing any special dharma; there is no false projection of producing dharmas without outflows or stopping bad dharmas; there is no false projection of annihilating the dharmas of cyclic existence or of making purification permanent; there is no false projection of being one or being different things; there is no false projection of coming about through the power of bodhisattva activities not there before or being separated from all obscurations; there is no false projection of having earlier become defiled by afflictions, secondary afflictions, and so on, and later being purified; there is no false projection of making dark dharmas decline and making bright dharmas increase; there is no false projection of being included in the three periods of time; there is no false projection of being established in the three realms or of having to transcend them; and there is no false projection of bestowing the perfection of giving and so on, or of removing their opposing sides of miserliness and so on.
“Subhūti, whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise”
is teaching the mark of all dharmas that remain in the same state, nothing doing anything at all. Those “tathāgatas,” so called because they know just this state in which dharmas remain, appear in the world. It means just this is their  clear realization, just this is
“the wheel of Dharma.”
“Subhūti… it is not a second turning of the wheel of Dharma and it is not a first turning either.”
It says this because ultimately all dharmas are beyond counting. It
“has not been made available in order to turn or not turn any Dharma”
removes the notion or idea that it is turning or not turning the wheel of Dharma.
“Given the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature”
means the perfection of wisdom grasps all dharmas as the mark of the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. 
“The perfection of wisdom is a great perfection,”
and so on. With the ninety-five statements the elder Subhūti explains at length that this perfection of wisdom engages with all dharmas.
 There “the perfection of wisdom is a great perfection” teaches that it is a great object, and a great secret in the form of an object. It says about such a secret that it is three: a secret engagement with dharmas, a secret awakening, and a secret turning of the wheel of Dharma.
 There, for dharmas, governed by the conventional and ultimate, it engages with perceiving dharmas as dharmas and also engages with perceiving them as not dharmas as well, so it says
“all dharmas are empty of the intrinsic nature of all dharmas.”
It teaches awakening but also sees the nonexistence of awakening, so it says
“but still, bodhisattva great beings abiding in this perfection of wisdom fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening without fully awakening to any dharma at all.”
Teaching the secret turning of the wheel of Dharma, it says
“will turn the wheel of the Dharma but will not turn or not turn  any Dharma.”
 Then there is the section with the eightfold turning of the wheel of Dharma: the nonexistence of the Dharma, the nonexistence of the wheel, the nonexistence of the turning, the nonexistence of the intrinsic nature of an explanation, the nonexistence of one who explains, the nonexistence of one who listens, the nonexistence of realization, and the nonexistence of a noble person.
 There, about the nonexistence of the Dharma, it says
“will not see any Dharma at all, and will not not see any Dharma at all either.”
 About the nonexistence of the wheel, it says
“because a Dharma that will be turned or will not be turned cannot be apprehended.”
 About the nonexistence of turning, it says
“emptiness does not turn it, nor does it not turn it. The signless and the wishless also do not turn it, nor do they not turn it.”
 About the nonexistence of an explanation, it says
“therefore, this teaching of the perfection of wisdom, this illumination,”
up to
“is the teaching of the perfection of wisdom that is perfectly pure.”
 About the nonexistence of one who explains, it says
“nobody teaches that teaching of the perfection of wisdom.”
 About the nonexistence of one who listens, it says
“and nobody receives it.”
 About the nonexistence of realization, it says
“nobody has directly realized it.”
 And about the absence of a noble person, it says
“nobody has entered into nirvāṇa either. And in this Dharma teaching there is also nobody who becomes worthy of offerings.”
Glosses
“Because space is a nonexistent thing, Subhūti”—
like space, it is not truly real in a form you can apprehend, and not not truly real in a form that cannot be apprehended. 
“Because all dharmas are equally nonapprehendable, Subhūti”—
all dharmas are equally imaginary  with a nature that cannot be apprehended. 
“Because of not having a name and body”—
this means formless dharmas and form dharmas are not in the form of names.
“Because the movement of breath in and out is unfindable”—
this is because upon analysis there is no movement of breath in and out because the body is empty like space.
“Because applied and sustained thought is unfindable”—
it says this because the two, applied and sustained thought, occasion words, because it is said, “Having applied their mind and thought in a sustained way earlier, later on they deliver a speech.”
“Because the feeling, perception, volitional factors, and consciousness aggregates are unfindable.”
Because they have no form they are in their nature just a collection of names.
“Because all phenomena do not go away.”
Because all phenomena are separated from going.
“Because all dharmas cannot be seized.”
Dharmas do not seize dharmas, so it 
“is not stolen.”
“Because all dharmas have come to an end in extreme purity.”
Because all dharmas appear as an extreme purity they do not arise and are not stopped, and hence appear to have come to an end. 
“Because all dharmas do not arise and do not stop.”
All dharmas are empty. They appear as not arising and as not stopping.
“Because death and rebirth are unfindable.”
It knows that the time of deaths and rebirths appear based on false imagination, not ultimately. 
“Because all dharmas are indestructible in their nature.”
It is indestructible because the nature of all dharmas is suchness, so it does not change. 
“Because a dream that has been seen cannot be apprehended.”
Just as that thing existent in a dream which has been seen in a dream  cannot be apprehended and does not exist, so too all phenomena are there as nonexistent things.
“This is a perfection without purification… because the presence of defilement cannot be apprehended.”
There can be purification if there is defilement, but all phenomena are pure in their nature so there is no defilement and there is no purification either. 
“This is a perfection that does not stand… because all phenomena cannot be apprehended.”
Because all phenomena cannot be apprehended they therefore are not apprehended as standing anywhere. 
“Because it is a full awakening to all dharmas as unmistaken suchness.”
All phenomena are the intrinsic nature of unmistaken suchness, which is to say, they make manifest that unmistaken intrinsic nature so they make available the wisdom that knows “all phenomena are calm.”
“Because the causal sign of greed cannot be apprehended.”
There is no causal sign that is a basis to become attached to. 
“Because hate is not real.”
Because the causal sign that serves as a cause of hate does not exist.
“This perfection of wisdom is a perfection that is not a means of measurement… because all phenomena do not fully arise.”
It might be supposed that all phenomena are caused to fully arise on account of a means of measurement. But this perfection of wisdom does not see the emergence of a basis for the measurement of any phenomenon, therefore it is “not a means of measurement.” 
“Because all phenomena are distinct.” 
Because all dharmas are isolated.
“Because the measure of all phenomena cannot be apprehended.”
There might be a means of measurement were there something to be measured. But because a means of measurement of all phenomena, were there to be something measured, cannot be apprehended and does not exist, therefore something to be measured does not exist either.
“Because all phenomena are without attachment like space.” 
All phenomena, similar to space, are without attachment. 
“This… is an impermanent perfection
Because all dharmas are unproduced, like horns on a rabbit and so on, they are not destroyed. Therefore, they do not exist. They are impermanent because they are not existent things, because scripture says that “the meaning of a nonexistent thing is the meaning of impermanence.”
“Because all phenomena are not suitable to be clung to.”
All phenomena are not suitable to be clung to, or to be stayed with, or to be made use of, so it is suffering.
“This… is a perfection of the empty… because an intrinsic nature of all phenomena cannot be apprehended.”
Those intrinsic natures—easily breakable, experience, and so on—do not ultimately exist. Therefore, those phenomena are empty of those intrinsic natures. 
“This… is a selfless perfection… because all phenomena are not settled down on.”
The “phenomena,” form and so on, do not exist. They are therefore not suitable to be “settled down on.” Since that is the case, the nonexistence of all the phenomena is selflessness. Even though there is no difference in the meaning of emptiness and selflessness, based on being designated they are differentiated. “The empty” is being without something else. To illustrate, you say “an empty pot” when it has no water. Similarly, because they are without an intrinsic nature, their “defining mark” and so on, those phenomena are thought of as “empty.” As for “selfless,” it is the nonexistence of the phenomena, like, to illustrate, the magically produced illusion of elephants and so on. You say “empty” when you want to say those phenomena are separated from their defining marks and so on. You say “selfless” when you want to say that “they are not existent”—they are not existent things.
“Because all phenomena  have no causal sign.”
Given that a causal sign is a defining mark and there is no such defining mark they are 
“without a defining mark.”
“Because the emptiness of emptiness cannot be apprehended.”
This means there is just no second emptiness in emptiness. The empty is said to be “emptiness.” An “empty” that is a different attribute called “emptiness” does not exist at all. 
“The great emptiness cannot be apprehended.”
“Great emptiness” is said of the immensity of just the nonexistence of forms for all the directions. A different attribute called “the great emptiness” does not exist at all. 
 You should construe them all like this as well.
“This… is a perfection that is the emptiness of a basic nature… because compounded and uncompounded dharmas cannot be apprehended.”
This means if compounded and uncompounded dharmas were findable, their basic nature would be not empty, but all dharmas are empty, hence their “emptiness of a basic nature.”
“This… is a perfection that is giving… because miserliness cannot be apprehended.”
The miserliness that cannot be apprehended in the perfection of wisdom is the mark of giving. 
 You should construe the others like this as well.
“This… is a perfection that is the ten powers… because all the aspects of all dharmas cannot be apprehended.”
All the aspects of all dharmas would fall within the range of the ten knowledges—the power that is knowledge of the possible and impossible and so on. But they are not within their range, they are unreal aspects. So, because those aspects do not ultimately exist, therefore the aspects that serve as the objects of the ten powers are seen not to exist, hence it is “a perfection that is the ten powers.” 
“Because the knowledge of path aspects is not cowed.”
The knowledge of path aspects of bodhisattvas  is not cowed by any phenomenon. Therefore, the knowledge of path aspects, which in its nature is uncowed by anything, is
“a perfection that is fearlessness.” 
“Because knowledge is totally unattached and unimpeded.”
Because the knowledge of bodhisattvas is totally unattached and unimpeded, therefore it is
“a perfection that is detailed and thorough knowledge.”
“Because it has gone beyond all śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha attributes.”
Because śrāvakas and so on do not have this perfection of wisdom it is therefore counted as
“a perfection that is the… attributes of a buddha.”
“This… is a perfection that is the realized one… because what has been spoken by all the buddhas is reality.”
By a creative explanation, the realized one is so called because of having spoken thus, which is to say, the perfection of wisdom that observes thus—what has been spoken by all the buddhas—is called the “perfection that is the realized one.”
“This… is a perfection that is self-originated… because it is in control of all dharmas.”
Because all dharmas are under its control, therefore it predominates among all dharmas so it is a “self-originated perfection.”
Explanation of Chapters 39 to 42
Absence of a practice and signs of completion
 It is easy to explain Śatakratu’s praise passage, the elder Śāriputra passage, and the Lord’s rejoicing passage so they are just as they are in the Sūtra.
“When practicing the perfection of wisdom [they] do not stand in form, and when they do not stand in form they practice the yoga of form.”
The bodhisattvas’ transcendental knowledge of a knower of path aspects does not stand in any phenomenon, therefore just that not standing is their “practice of the yoga.” 
“Furthermore, Kauśika, they do not practice the yoga of a bodhisattva’s form, and  thus not practicing the yoga of form like that, they practice the yoga of form.”
The earlier subsection of the passage refutes standing; here it refutes what is established by not standing.
“Do not apprehend form as past,”
and so on, teaches that they do not apprehend it in any of the three time periods. 
“Śāriputra, it is because the depth of form is not form.”
It says this because “the depth” is falsely imagined, so form itself ultimately does not exist. 
 The interpretation of the depth subsection, hard to fathom subsection, and immeasurable subsection; the Śatakratu passage and obtaining a prediction; the wilderness analogy, the spring analogy, and the pregnant woman analogy; and the passage on taking care of and teaching others is easy.
 There are two signs that 
“the meditation on the perfection of wisdom… is completed”—
when they 
“do not see… an increase… or a decline in”
all dharmas, and when they see the marks of dharmas.
That the inconceivable has been taught and that they do not conceptualize the inconceivable are also signs that 
“the meditation on the perfection of wisdom… is completed.”
 The sign that they are practicing the six perfections is that they
“do not mentally construct and do not conceive of form, do not mentally construct and do not conceive of a causal sign of form, and do not mentally construct and do not conceive of an intrinsic nature of form.”
With the meditative stabilization on emptiness they do not mentally construct dharmas; with the meditative stabilization on signlessness they do not mentally construct causal signs; and with the meditative stabilization on wishlessness they do not mentally construct an intrinsic nature. They do not conceptualize falsely imagined phenomena; they do not conceptualize dependent phenomena.
 Earlier it said that it is deep because of the depth of suchness; here, having superimposed the mark of suchness onto form and so on, and saying that it is deep, is because of the various dispositions of trainees.
“Lord, the perfection of wisdom is an aggregate of the purity  of all dharmas”
means it is pure and it is the aggregate of all dharmas.
“Lord, that… would not give rise to many hindrances would be amazing.”
It says this having in mind that there are many obstacles to something excellent.
Next, the explanation of the teaching about the merit from reciting the good Dharma is easy.
Last of the five hundreds
 “During the last of the ‘five hundreds’ ”—
a “five hundred” incorporates five one hundreds. It is said that the time the doctrine of the Tathāgata lasts is five thousand years. If you break up and subdivide the five thousand years into five-hundred-year periods, there are ten five hundreds. For these there are ten chapters: first, three chapters (the Understanding chapter, Practice chapter, and Scripture chapter). There the Understanding chapter is again subdivided into three chapters (the Worthy One chapter, Non-returner chapter, and stream enterer chapter); the Practice chapter too is subdivided into three chapters (the Insight chapter, Meditative Stabilization chapter, and Morality chapter); and the Scripture chapter is also subdivided into three (the Abhidharma chapter, Sūtra chapter, and Vinaya chapter). These nine chapters and the Mere Signs chapter are the ten chapters.
 There, each of the ten chapters lasts five hundred years, so, the ten chapters comprise ten five hundreds that become the five thousand years. 
 There, in the first of all the five hundreds are the worthy ones; in the second five hundred, the non-returners; in the third, the stream enterers; in the fourth five hundred, insight; in the fifth, meditative stabilization; in the sixth, morality; in the seventh, the abhidharma; in the eighth, the sūtras; in the ninth, the vinaya; and in the tenth five hundred, a mere sign. It is just this that is called “the last of the five hundreds.” 
 Some say “the measure of a human lifespan can be one hundred years. There in the earlier fifty years the color, shape, strength,  intellect and so on increase, and in the later fifty years they wane. Similarly, the end of the time period, the time of the waning of the teaching, is like the later fifty years and hence is labeled ‘the last of the five hundreds.’ ” 
 *When formulated like that, the duration of the lasting of the Tathāgata’s teaching is two thousand five hundred years. The two commentaries appear to be contradictory. Śāntarakṣita’s intention is that the good Dharma lasts from the Worthy One chapter up to the Meditative Stabilization chapter. There is the explanation in the explanatory tradition and there is this other expanation. In general there is agreement on five thousand years.*
 The explanation of the teaching of all the benefits of the good qualities is easy.
Explanation of the work of Māra
 The work of Māra: 
“When it takes a really long time to have the confidence to speak”
it becomes an impediment; and, 
“when the confidence to speak happens too fast,”
bodhisattvas become arrogant and act with disrespect. There is
“yawning”
and being arrogant;
“laughing”—
laughing or joking with each other when the Dharma is being explained; and
“fooling with each other”
when they make the other want to laugh. 
“Attached to each other as friends”—
they do it to protect each other’s minds; they do not do it out of faith. There is also the reading “attached to other readings while not knowing what the meaning is.”
“While if they yawn while… taking it up”—
in regard to these five, yawning and so on, the earlier five are when they are writing it out; here it is when they are taking it up in their minds. 
“As many thoughts as they have to leave, they appropriate that many eons of practice.”
They have to practice the yoga of the perfection of wisdom again for as many eons as the thoughts they have to leave, because they do not reach maturity for that many eons, since their thought is confused. 
“Those… would reject the root of the tree of the knowledge of all aspects.”
To illustrate, if you get rid of the root of a tree you will not get 
“the branches, petals, and leaves”
as the outcome you aim for. Similarly, without the tree of the knowledge of all aspects you will not get śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas that are like the branches and leaves and so on. That is the meaning. 
 Connect this here in the same way: it is just as
“a dog might spurn”
its master’s tasty 
“food”
that is easy to get, and go looking for
“food from a servant”
that it either does not get, or only gets a bit of. 
 Similarly, connect this in the same way: it is just as when
“somebody finds an elephant,”
rejects it, and makes the absurd statement, “I am interested in 
‘the track’
of the elephant, I am not interested in the elephant.” 
 The illustration of
“the hoofprint left by a bull,”
and the analogy of the 
“contractor who wants to build a Vaijayanta palace”
who looks for a
“celestial mansion circle,”
thinking a Vaijayanta palace is also just that measure, are similar.
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom does not give confidence to speak”
because it does not conceptualize; 
“is inconceivable”
because it is beyond the range of speculative thought;
“is without production and without cessation”
because it is thoroughly established as a final outcome that does not alter;
“is without defilement and without purification”
because it is pure in its basic nature;
“is without distraction”
because it is always in meditative equipoise;
“is not something that can be spoken out loud”
because it is self-reflexive analytic knowledge;
“is not part of a conversation”
because it is beyond language; 
“is not something that can be talked about”
because it is beyond applied thought and sustained thought; and
“cannot be apprehended”
because it is separated from apprehending anything as an existent thing. If they
“form the notion ‘this deep perfection of wisdom is not an existent thing,’ Subhūti, they should know that this too is the work of Māra.”
If they explain the perfection of wisdom with the notion that it does not exist, there is the fault of not honoring it.
“The perfection of wisdom is without letters,”
because it is not something that can be spoken out loud and is not something that can be heard.
 The rest of the works of Māra are easy to understand.
Revealing this world
“Subhūti… this deep perfection of wisdom gives birth to a tathāgata’s ten powers,”
and so on, teaches that it gives birth to the ultimate tathāgata because it gives birth to the buddhadharmas. 
“Reveals this world”—
it says it “reveals this world” in eleven forms: it reveals the world of the aggregates; it reveals that the basic nature of all dharmas cannot be designated or apprehended;  it reveals the thought activities of all beings and the divisions and so on; it reveals the suchness of all phenomena; it reveals that the mark of all phenomena is no mark; it reveals the power of being cognizant of what has been done, and acknowledging what has been done, and the nonexistence of one who knows and the nonexistence of one who sees; it reveals all unseen dharmas; and it reveals the power of one who knows, one who understands, one who is aware of, and one who reveals a description of the world as empty, and who reveals this world as inconceivable and isolated, without an interior and so on, and at peace on account of the nonexistence of a perception of this world or the world beyond.
 Among those,
“Subhūti, the Tathāgata has said that the five aggregates are the world… the perfection of wisdom does not reveal those five aggregates as being destroyed, nor does it reveal them as being really destroyed.”
The perfection of wisdom sees only the suchness of the aggregates, not the falsely imagined aggregates. Take “destroyed” and “really destroyed” as getting used up and becoming ruined. 
“If even this very perfection of wisdom does not exist and is not apprehended in this deep perfection of wisdom, how could form ever exist or be apprehended?”
This means that if even this very perfection of wisdom does not appear to the nonconceptual perfection of wisdom when an apprehended and an apprehender have become equally the same, it goes without saying form and so on do not. 
“Subhūti, the tathāgatas know those collected thoughts and distracted thoughts of those beings for what they are through the true nature of dharmas.”
To “know collected thoughts and distracted thoughts” is to know collected thoughts and distracted thoughts as not what they are, as nonexistent, by seeing the true dharmic nature of thought.  Then it says, 
“How do they know those collected thoughts and distracted thoughts?”
And it teaches that they are 
“inexhaustible… free from greed… cessation,”
and so on, saying to “know those thoughts” is to know all thoughts as being in their true dharmic nature “inexhaustible,” in their true dharmic nature
“an abandonment,”
and 
“isolated”
from an intrinsic nature. 
 Then, with
“Subhūti, a mind that is greedy is not a mind as it really is,”
it teaches that they know a thought that is greedy and so on. 
 Here, in regard to
“know a greedy thought… for what it is, a greedy thought,”
if there is such knowledge of greed, thought, and greediness, then the “greedy” thought is not a phenomenon as it really is. A phenomenon “as it really is,” a thought that is a phenomenon “as it really is,” is a phenomenon isolated from an intrinsic nature. The Tathāgata has an extremely pure consciousness and has not grasped thought, or greed, or a dharma that is a mental factor, or being greedy and so on, because falsely imagined temporary states when there are greedy thoughts and so on do not exist at all. Therefore, the passage here should be understood as follows: a thought that is greedy is not as it really is, is not a truth, so, having abandoned it, they “know it” in the form it is really in. That is the meaning.
 So it again teaches that they know a mind free from greed for what it is, with
“therefore, Subhūti, a mind that is free from greediness is not a mind that has greediness.”
What is this teaching?  Minds free from greed and minds with greediness are not only ultimately nonexistent, you cannot even say about a temporary state of a falsely imagined nature free from greed that “it is greedy,” because the two—free from greed and greedy—are impossible in one thought; two thoughts do not arise simultaneously. Therefore, not only is it unreal, but even in a falsely imagined form a mind free from greed cannot properly be “greedy,” so it says “free from greediness.” Similarly, connect this with
“free from hatred… and free from a confusion.”
“An inclusive thought… as an inclusive thought”
and 
“Subhūti, here the tathāgatas know that a thought of those… beings is not inclusive, … that a thought is not constricted,”
and so on, teach as follows: They do not view this one’s thought as “inclusive,” or another’s thought as “constricted”; that this one’s thought
“increases,”
or another’s thought 
“is reduced”;
or that this one’s thought 
“pervades,”
or another’s thought
“does not pervade.”
It teaches that they 
“know, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom,”
that that inclusive thought is a nonexistent thing, that it is does not exist, and that it is without an intrinsic nature; they thoroughly know 
“an inclusive thought as an inclusive thought,”
knowing it 
“for what it is,”
a nonexistent thing.
 Similarly, with
“that has become great.”
Here also,
“Subhūti, here the tathāgatas view a thought of other beings or other persons as not coming, as not going, as not lasting, as not arising, and as not stopping,”
and so on, explains this. “Great” here is in the sense of arising, in the sense of lasting  for an extended period, and in the sense of changing into something else marked by lasting and having an extended period. As for “has become,” it is in the sense of “coming and going.” A tathāgata’s wisdom does not view it like that; it views it solely as the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Since this is the case, it is saying that where “a thought has become big” its becoming big does not exist, so they “thoroughly know” of it that it is a nonexistent thing.
“Immeasurable thought”
is explained by saying they
“view that thought of… beings… as not there, as not interrupted, as not fixed, and as not not fixed,”
and so on. This teaches the following: You can suppose it is “immeasurable” in the sense that it is pervasive or is a basic element. The tathāgatas do not view an immeasurable thought like that; rather, they view all thoughts as having no fixed position and being without a foundation. When they view it like that, they
“know an immeasurable thought… for what it is.”
“[They] view that thought… as without a mark and separated from an intrinsic nature.”
Because it has no intrinsic nature and no mark it cannot show itself, so they view it as
“a thought… that does not show itself.”
“Those thoughts… are not even visible to the five eyes”— 
a thought forms, so take it as falsely imagined; furthermore, because that does not exist in itself, it is a nonexistent thing, so it does not appear to the eyes of those who see true reality. Hence,
“an invisible thought.”
That is the meaning.
“Thoughts that are clear, dull, abridged, and expanded”—
they know “clear” thoughts in the sense of those of tīrthikas who make philosophical errors grasping at permanence; the “dull” in the sense of those grasping at nihilism; the “abridged” in the sense of those who over-negate; and the “expanded” in the sense of those who over-reify 
“for what they are.”
“Based on form”
explains arising based on the five aggregates. 
“Refers to form”
means a thought has “been emitted” with form as its reference point, and they have settled down on it and say, “I am form.”
“Connect this in the same way also with”
refers to 
 “feeling” 
and so on. 
 Similarly, having taught that thoughts that have arisen from wrong views have “been emitted” and so on, now, to reveal those that have been emitted and so on from conceptual thought constructions, it says,
“Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to this deep perfection of wisdom the tathāgatas know form. How do they know form? They know it just as they know suchness—without distortion, without conceptualization,”
and so on. In six different ways they know all phenomena in their nature as “suchness.” There they know that they are “without distortion,” because of unaltered suchness; “without conceptualization,” because of unmistaken suchness; 
“without a causal sign,”
because of the very limit of reality;
“without effort,”
because there is no illumination;
“without thought construction,”
because they are isolated from an intrinsic nature;
“and without apprehending anything,”
because of the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. 
 Now, because all phenomena with outflows and without outflows, that are ordinary and extraordinary, and all superior persons and all superior dharmas, even the tathāgatas, are not broken apart in suchness, with
“therefore, Subhūti, the suchness of thoughts… that are clear, dull, abridged, and expanded is the suchness of the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, dependent origination,”
and so on, it reveals that as suchness, their intrinsic nature, all phenomena are not different.
Explanation of Chapters 43 to 45
Marks 
“Gods, this perfection of wisdom  is deep because it is marked by emptiness.”
The separation from falsely imagined phenomena that are the objects in the range of fools is “marked by emptiness.” The absence and total extinguishing of the causal signs of mental construction and conceptual thought projections is
“marked by signlessness.”
Not joining up later with what has been wished for, because all conceptualized wishes have been forsaken, is 
“marked by wishlessness.”
The uncompounded state is
“marked by the absence of production and stopping”
because all thought constructions conceiving of cause, condition, and result are severed. It is separated from production and so on. The absolutely purified state when there is a transformation of the basis through the four transformations is
“marked by the absence of defilement and the absence of purification.”
Like an illusion, a dream, a mirage, and so on, which are not thoroughly established and are nonexistent, a nonexistent thing is
“marked by the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.”
What has no standing anywhere, like space separated from all false imagination and thought construction, ultimately inexpressible, is
“marked by the absence of a foundation.”
Because a prior limit, a later limit, and a middle have been abandoned, the natural state of nirvāṇa separated from an existent thing and a nonexistent thing is 
“marked by the absence of annihilation and of going on and on forever.”
The nondual state separated from difference and unity is 
“marked by the absence of unity and the absence of difference”
because all conceptualizations of difference have stopped. The state separated from coming and going is 
“marked by the absence of coming and absence of going”
because all effort has been abandoned, illuminating does not exist, and an act of doing something does not exist. Because everything is totally separated  from all of its own characteristic marks, the place constituted by the unmarked is
“marked by space.”
Furthermore,
“the Tathāgata uses the conventional label as an ordinary conventional term, but not as an ultimate one”
says it is marked by being inexpressible. 
“Gods, the world with its gods and humans cannot alter those marks”
is saying that it is marked as thoroughly established because it is thoroughly established as being without alteration and thoroughly established as being without error.
“Gods, a mark does not make a mark into something else”
means suchness does not disturb suchness.
“A mark does not know a mark.”
Suchness does not know suchness, just as space does not know space. 
“A mark does not know the absence of a mark.”
Suchness does not know a falsely imagined phenomenon, just as space does not know a rabbit’s horns. 
“The absence of a mark does not know a mark.”
A falsely imagined phenomenon does not know suchness, just as a rabbit’s horns do not know space.
“And the absence of a mark does not know the absence of a mark.”
A falsely imagined phenomenon does not know a falsely imagined phenomenon, just as a rabbit’s horns do not know a rabbit’s horns.
“Therefore that mark, and that absence of a mark, and also both, do not have… the intrinsic nature of that which might cause knowing.”
An intrinsic nature of perceiving does not exist because suchness is nonconceptual, effortless, and does not stir, because a falsely imagined phenomenon does not exist. “That which might make known” is consciousness and so on. 
“Who might know”
is a person or a dharma. 
“To whom it might be made known” 
is another person or a dharma. 
“Gods, those marks are not occasioned by form,”
and so on, reveals that it is marked by not occasioning anything. 
“Because all marks have no mark”— 
because the aforementioned emptiness, signlessness, and so on, and all compounded and uncompounded phenomena, are marked as falsely imagined phenomena is the meaning. 
“Whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise,”
and so on, is speaking about the defining mark of phenomena remaining in the same state.
“The element of marks simply remains as it really is, the element of no marks. A tathāgata has perfectly and fully awakened to that.”
It is called “the element of no marks” because all conceptualizations of a mark are absent. 
“Therefore a tathāgata is called a ‘tathāgata.’ ”
Through a creative explanation they are called “tathāgatas” because they have realized as suchness or because they have realized suchness.
“The Tathāgata has given an exposition of all marks by giving an exposition of the perfection of wisdom”
is indicating the earlier statement, “Gods, this is deep because it is marked by emptiness, it is marked by signlessness,” and so on. 
“Having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening… [he] has differentiated all the marks”
means that even though they have fully awakened to such a nonconceptual ultimate they still explain the conventional marks for the benefit of beings.
“The mark of form is something that can show itself,”
and so on, teaches the conventional defining marks.
Appreciation and gratitude
[The tathāgatas] 
“have appreciation and a feeling of gratitude”
for this [perfection of wisdom]. They think ‘We have done this and we have asserted this’ because they realize what they have done and achieved. 
“Fully awakened to all dharmas as not done and not changed”— 
they have “fully awakened” to dharmas constituted by what has not been done—that nobody has done. As for “not changed,” they have fully awakened without distortion; they know them as unchanging. 
“Because there is no body”—
this is the nonexistence of a body, the nonexistence of an interior, formlessness. Therefore, Subhūti, the nonexistence of a body, this interior, is
“the Tathāgata’s cognizance of what has not been done, and acknowledgment of what has not been done.” 
He is cognizant of what has not been done because he is cognizant of the mark of uncompounded phenomena.
“Furthermore, Subhūti, thanks to the perfection of wisdom, on account of the force of ultimately not originating, the unmade transcendental knowledge has engaged with all dharmas.”
“On account of the force of ultimately not originating” means based on the ultimate being unproduced and unoriginated. It is teaching that the transcendental knowledge of the tathāgatas is the mark of the thoroughly established dharma body and hence is “unmade,” so the Tathāgata cognizes what has not been done.
“Lord, when all dharmas are not producers and are not seers”
is teaching that there has been no production so there is no producer, therefore it is not feasible that 
“the perfection of wisdom gives birth”; 
it does not cause seeing so there is no seer, so it is not feasible that it 
“reveals the world.”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!”
and so on is teaching 
“because all dharmas are empty, ring hollow, are in vain… are not producers and are not revealers,”
that it is true, and in the ordinary world there is nobody who knows such a reality. It is teaching “Still, he, thanks to the perfection of wisdom, has fully awakened to this reality as it actually is, therefore it has given birth to him and reveals the world.” He intends this as a statement of praise. 
“It reveals it, moreover, because form is not seen.”
Because he does not see form, therefore it reveals it. Were he to have seen form,  he would have seen reality imperfectly, like somebody with a visual distortion, so it also would not reveal it. 
“Subhūti, when a consciousness with form as objective support does not arise”—
when a consciousness with bristly strands of hair and so on as its objective support arises in somebody with a visual distortion, and then later on does not arise, you say sight has become clear. Similarly, here too, there is the locution 
“it reveals”
because “consciousness and so on with form as objective support does not arise.” 
“Reveals… [that the world] is inconceivable”—
because suchness is beyond the range of speculative thought.
“Subhūti, form is inconceivable, incomparable, immeasurable, uncountable, and equal to the unequaled because it does not appear.”
“Form” does not appear. And why? Falsely imagined form does not exist, like a rabbit’s horns, so “it does not appear”; the true dharmic nature of form cannot be apprehended by any consciousness so “it does not appear,” and because it thus does not appear it is therefore “inconceivable,” “incomparable,” “immeasurable,” and so on. 
 The teaching about “inconceivable” and so on is easy to understand as found in the scripture. In it,
“all mental and mental factor dharmas are not apprehended”
means cannot be grasped by “all mental and mental factor dharmas,” so it says that “it does not appear.”
Why does Subhūti, with
“it is made available to serve a great purpose,”
and so on, again introduce an exposition of a part of the text that has already been explained? He says that in order to gather a retinue, and also because, having introduced just that, he wants a greater enthusiasm. Earlier it taught that it benefits the practice prior to a buddha; now it is teaching that it does the work of a buddha.
“This deep  perfection of wisdom is made available so that you do not hold on to and do not settle down on form.”
Because from seeing the perfection of wisdom they do not on account of craving come to “hold on to” and on account of a view “settle down on form” and so on—the dharmas—therefore it is put into words as “this deep perfection of wisdom is made available so you do not hold on to and do not settle down,” which is to say, it teaches that it is for a truly great purpose.
“Subhūti, I too…”
He is saying he himself is in full control.
“That knowledge and abandonment of faith-followers, dharma-followers, up to worthy ones, and pratyekabuddhas, is the forbearance of bodhisattvas who have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of all dharmas”
teaches that a bodhisattva’s wisdom is greater. Just by merely having entered into the eighth level and gained the forbearance for dharmas that are not produced, the knowledges and the abandonments of all afflictions that are the result of the path to all śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha worthy ones are completed. Their knowledge and abandonment do not exceed that forbearance. From here the bodhisattvas are totally without afflictions. Up to here the bodhisattvas described as those “who have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas” are the ones without afflictions.
“Before they had gone very far disappeared”—
this explanation teaches that their work has been completed. 
Then the elder Subhūti, to engender respect in persons with perfect belief in this explanation and so on, asks about their birth. It says,
“Where did they die, Lord, the bodhisattva great beings who have taken birth here and believe in this deep perfection of wisdom the moment they hear it?”
and so on. Here it also gives an exposition of the three bodhisattvas that make up the bright side and the three that make up the dark side. Those who
“have died a human and taken birth as a human” 
are good. The second who,
“having died in other buddhafields, take birth”
among humans are good. The third who 
“have died among the Tuṣita gods and taken birth here”
are also good. As for the three on the dark side, there are those who are not endowed with having
“heard or asked about it in the past [and] have taken birth here,” 
but do not believe in the explanation; the second, who are also not endowed with having heard and so on, hear it here just because of faith, but 
“get robbed”
and become uncertain; and the third, who have asked about this explanation in the past just because of faith but still are not endowed with taking it up and so on, and who later fall into 
“the Śrāvaka and the Pratyekabuddha”
Vehicles.
 Here the analogy of 
“the boat on the ocean,”
the analogy of 
“the pot,”
and then the analogies of 
“the ship”
and
“the very old man”
are easy to understand as found in the scripture.
 To teach that when they do not have such a perfection of wisdom and skillful means they fall into the two vehicles, and that when they do have them they reach unsurpassed, complete awakening, Subhūti asks how it is that they do not have those two, and asks how it is that they do not not have those two.
 At that time the Lord puts into words that not having the six perfections is because of the power of apprehending and because of the power of pride, and that they fall to one of the two deficient levels. He teaches that those who do not apprehend the six perfections and have no pride 
“reach unsurpassed, complete awakening.”
“It is because the perfection of giving has gone to the near shore.”
The side that is the knowledge of path aspects of bodhisattvas—the absence of conceptualization—is “gone to the near shore.” The side that is the knowledge of all aspects of buddhas is “gone to the farther shore,” because it is the perfection  of the absence of conceptualization. Therefore, it says 
“knows the near shore and knows the farther shore.”
 Then the section of the text to do with skillful means is in just that sequence as well.
How those new to the bodhisattva vehicle train
 Having thus heard that those who do not have the perfection of wisdom and skillful means fall into the two vehicles, thinking, “How, then, do they become those who have newly set out in the vehicle and are beginning the work,” Subhūti asks,
“Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings beginning the work train in the perfection of wisdom?”
And the Lord, because those who are beginning the work definitely have to have spiritual friends, therefore teaches that they 
“should attend on spiritual friends.”
“You should not hold as an absolute,”
and 
“you should not produce a longing for form”
means do not, because of conceptual views and attachment to an ultimate, set your hopes on something.
Nine qualities of the doers of the difficult
 Then the elder Subhūti said,
“Lord, those bodhisattvas who want unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, even while all phenomena are empty of their own marks, are doers of the difficult.”
In that context the Lord makes nine statements:
“ ‘May I for the world’s benefit and happiness… become the protector… refuge… resting place… final ally… island… leader and… support. May I become the benefit and happiness of the world: its protector, refuge, resting place, final ally, island, leader, and support,”
which he then explains in detail, discussing each separately. “The benefit” is the intention to liberate beings from all forms of life and establish them in a place without fear; “the happiness” is the intention to liberate them from suffering and establish them in happiness; “the protector” is the intention to teach the doctrine in order to protect them from suffering; “the refuge” is the intention to liberate those afflicted by suffering from that suffering and establish them in the nirvāṇa without any aggregates remaining;  “the resting place” is the intention to explain the doctrine in order that they will have no attachment; “the final ally” is the intention to explain by way of all phenomena, form and so on, the father shore of phenomena; “the island” is the intention to explain the doctrine in a delimited form like an island that is circumscribed; “the leader” is the intention, because of great compassion for beings, to explain the doctrine that leads to nirvāṇa; and “the support” is the intention to understand analytically the places supporting life that are, in brief, eighty-five. Those are the successive contents of the passage.
“Lord, how are all phenomena not mingled?”
During saṃsāra, when the falsely imagined and the thoroughly established are as one, are there not broken apart, at that time, when the two are undifferentiable, they are “mingled.” When there has been a gradual transformation through the force of listening, thinking, and meditating in harmony with the extremely pure dharma-constituent as cause, at that time, when the two—the falsely imagined and the thoroughly established—have become differentiated and a transformation into the extremely pure, stainless, intrinsic nature has come about, they are “not mingled.”
“The nonconnection… the nonproduction… the noncessation,”
and so on, are synonymous with just that. 
“The farther shore of form is not form.”
This is saying that suchness is the farther shore of form because in it the mark of form has been eliminated. Therefore, that suchness that serves as the farther shore of form is not the intrinsic nature of falsely imagined form. 
“Subhūti, as form really is, so too are all dharmas.”
It says this because all phenomena have suchness as their intrinsic nature, not because they are connected with it. 
 What is intended by, 
“Will not bodhisattva great beings have indeed fully awakened  to the knowledge of all aspects?”
It intends to say that if all dharmas are as form really is, well then, with the clear realization of form comes the clear realization of all dharmas and hence the attainment of the knowledge of all aspects.
“Lord, on the farther shore of form there is no thought construction whatsoever.”
Were there to be a thought construction of form in the suchness that is the farther shore of form, then, with the realization of the farther shore of form there would not be the realization of all phenomena, there would just be the realization of form alone. But, because it is suchness, there is no thought construction of form on the farther shore of form, hence the realization of just that is established as the realization of all phenomena. 
 Because phenomena are seen to be like islands, they are “islands.”
“Form is delimited by a past and a future.”
Ultimately form has never arisen in the past and ultimately will never arise in the future because it does not exist during all periods of time. 
“Subhūti, that delimitation of all phenomena by a past and a future… is calm, it is sublime.”
This is teaching that the nonapprehension of all phenomena, because of the emptiness of time, is the ultimate, is viable.
“Form has space as its way of being.”
This means ultimate form, like space, is untainted and unchanging.
“The emptiness of form does not go and does not come”
means the emptiness of form does not go anywhere, even when together with thought construction, and also does not come from anywhere later on when there is no thought construction. 
“Subhūti, all phenomena have emptiness as their way of being”
means they have emptiness as their intrinsic nature. 
“Because they do not pass beyond that way of being” 
is saying that the intrinsic nature is not removed from those phenomena. They
“have the unborn and unreal as their way of being”— 
they are not born—have not arisen—through the force of causes and conditions, and are not real things because in their intrinsic nature they are not produced.
“Subhūti, all phenomena have the limitless”—
they are not destroyed so they are “limitless”; they are immeasurable, so they are 
“boundless.”
Alternatively, they are “limitless” because they do not go on and on forever and are not annihilated, and “boundless” because they are not embodied. They
“have the absence of being taken away from and the absence of being added to as their way of being.”
“The absence of being taken away from” is because there is no over-negation of what exists; “the absence of being added to” is because there is no over-reification of what does not exist. They
“have not going and not coming as their way of being.”
They are “not coming” because they have not come from anywhere, and they are “not going” because they are not going anywhere. They
“have not bringing in and not sending out as their way of being.”
At the time of the action they are “not bringing in,” and at the time of karmic maturation they are not “not sending out.” They
“have not joining, not not joining, not mingling, and not not mingling as their way of being.”
Even when there is thought construction the falsely imagined is not joined together with suchness; and even later when there is no thought construction it is not not joined. You should construe “not mingling and not not mingling” like this as well.
Explanation of Chapters 46 to 50
“In their intrinsic nature they are isolated from the elimination of greed,”
and so on. There is no elimination of greed and so on because they are isolated in their intrinsic nature, hence
“the tokens of greed”
and so on, the tokens of a course of conduct that is greedy and so on, the causes of greed and so on, the objective supports of greed and so on, and greed and the absence of greed and so on—all these dharmas have come about from mind, so it says
“that armor is not spliced with form.”
This is teaching that because those dharmas, “form” and so on,
“absolutely do not exist,”
they have not been buckled with this armor,  having apprehended the causal signs of those phenomena. This is the armor of signlessness. 
“Lord, bodhisattva great beings have not buckled on armor for the sake of only a partial number of beings.”
There is no partial number at all they have decided on, thinking, “We will place beings up to this number in nirvāṇa.”
Cultivation and disintegration
“It is not something that somebody has to meditate on,”
because there is no agent. 
“It is not something that has to be meditated on somewhere,”
because an attribute that has to be cultivated is nowhere to be seen. 
“It is not something that has to be meditated on somehow,”
because an attention that has to be meditated on is also not to be seen. This is
“the disintegration of meditation”
means it causes the nonexistence of meditation.
“Subhūti, you should look closely at a bodhisattva great being in this deep perfection of wisdom irreversible from progress toward awakening.”
You should look closely at irreversible great bodhisattvas—because of this perfection of wisdom are they irreversible, or not? 
“Is the bodhisattva great being not attached to this deep perfection of wisdom?”
then teaches the causal signs to be looked at closely. It says “to this deep perfection of wisdom,” up to
“the perfection of giving,”
up to all 
“the emptinesses,”
finishing with
“the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha,”
up to
“the knowledge of all aspects.”
So, “you should look closely” whether “the bodhisattva great beings” are “irreversible”—are not attached to those and do they not stand on those. 
 Because of their disposition, about 
“what others have said”
some do not perceive an essential point, some do not believe it, and some do not get attached. They do not get angry and remain in equanimity. Some, because of their disposition, are
“not separated from”
the six perfections. 
Some, when they have heard this deep doctrine, 
“do not tremble,”
and so on;
“delight in”
it more and more; and listen, 
“take it up, and bear it in mind.”
You should know that when they have those attributes they are irreversible from progress toward awakening.
“Should think carefully about this deep perfection of wisdom”— 
“think carefully” with special insight during clear realization—
“with a mindstream inclined to emptiness, tending to emptiness, and heading to emptiness.”
Those three statements are governed by small, middling, and big. It means they should think carefully, having come to a clear realization, through the true dharmic nature of 
“emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, the unproduced, the unceasing, the absence of defilement, the absence of purification,”
and so on. 
Suchness and its indivisibility
 Having said that, 
The elder Subhūti inquired, “Lord, do they also think about form?”
and so on. “Lord, they thus think about this deep perfection of wisdom with a mind-stream inclined to emptiness. Should they similarly think about dharmas—form, feeling, perception, and so on—as well, or should they not?” Then,
the Lord said, “Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not think about form,”
and so on, teaches that at the time of clear realization, dharmas—form and so on—do not appear because they are nonexistent things. Therefore, full awakening is not through the dharmas
“form, feeling,”
and so on, up to, finally,
“the knowledge of all aspects,”
but is the clear realization of their suchness. That suchness, furthermore, is not broken apart. The suchness of all dharmas, form and so on,  and the suchness of the knowledge of all aspects are one. It means that they “do not think about” the dharmas “form” and so on because the suchness is the same. 
“Nobody has made the knowledge of all aspects, nobody has made it change. It has not come from anywhere, and is not going anywhere,”
and so on, teaches that if the knowledge of all aspects were to be something that is made; or that changes; or that comes, goes, or remains; or is in one place but not another; or has a 
“number,”
and so on, it would be a falsely imagined mental image, and then it might fully awaken to dharmas, form and so on. But because it is separated from that mental image, is qualified by space, it cannot therefore fully awaken to form and so on. 
 Then, having heard this deep doctrine, 
“the gods,”
with 
“Lord… this deep perfection of wisdom,”
and so on, offer praise and say suchness is the true reality in which things are not different.
“Here where the habitual idea of two does not exist is the deep state of dharmas.”
Because all dharmas have suchness as their nature, and suchness is the same, it is customary to call it one; it is not customary to call it two. 
“Because space is deep,”
and so on, is just what has been explained before. 
“This doctrine is not taught so form will be taken up or will not be taken up.”
Seizing on a causal sign—this is form—it is “taken up.” Over-negating in all respects—form does not exist—it is “not taken up.” 
“This doctrine is not obstructed by form,”
and so on. It is not obstructed because it frames a state in harmony with all dharmas, which is to say, it is not obstructed by any dharma, form and so on, because the two extremes of over-reification and over-negation are absent. Thus, because imagined form does not exist,  the extreme of over-reification is absent, and because the true dharmic nature of form does exist, over-negation is absent, hence it is 
“in harmony with form.”
Similarly, for them all, 
“the suchness of form has not come and has not gone, and, similarly, the suchness of Subhūti has not come and has not gone,”
and so on, teaches that the suchness of the Tathāgata and the suchness of Subhūti are the same. It says “has not come and has not gone” to establish that Subhūti 
“takes after the Lord.”
He has not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere either. 
“Just that suchness of the Tathāgata is the suchness of all dharmas, and that suchness of all dharmas is the suchness of Subhūti.”
This means they are one because suchness is the same. 
“The suchness of the Tathāgata is established”
teaches that they are also one because of being marked by the establishment of dharmas. 
“Is unchanging and undifferentiated”— 
this “unchanging” teaches that it is a thoroughly established phenomenon because it is the thoroughly established phenomenon that does not alter. This “undifferentiated” teaches that it is a thoroughly established phenomenon because it is the thoroughly established phenomenon without error.
“Is not obstructed by anything”—
it extends over all dharmas, which is to say, it does not exist anywhere at all. Therefore, it says
“there is nothing of which that suchness is not the suchness.”
This means that it is also the suchness of all dharmas. 
“And it is never not suchness”—
it is also suchness at all times. It
“is not two”
because it is the same basic nature,
“and cannot be divided into two” 
because you cannot divide it into two types. 
“Just as the suchness of the Tathāgata is not broken apart, is not different, and cannot be apprehended, so too the suchness of all dharmas is not broken apart, is not different, and cannot  be apprehended. Similarly, the suchness of the elder Subhūti is not broken apart, is not different, and cannot be apprehended either.”
This is teaching that the suchness of all dharmas, like the suchness of the Tathāgata, in its nature cannot be apprehended so is not different. And the suchness of the elder Subhūti, like the suchness of all dharmas, also in its nature cannot be apprehended, so it is not different either.
 It means that just as the suchness of the Tathāgata cannot be broken apart because it is not two, is not different because it cannot be divided into two, and cannot be apprehended because in its nature it cannot be apprehended and hence is the same, and just as the suchness of all dharmas cannot be broken apart, is not different, and in its nature cannot be apprehended, so too the suchness of Subhūti cannot be broken apart and is not different either, because in its nature it too cannot be apprehended. 
“The suchness of the Tathāgata is not other than the suchness of all phenomena, and what is not other than the suchness of all phenomena is never not suchness. It is always suchness. The suchness of the elder Subhūti is like that. Therefore, since it is not something else, even though the elder Subhūti takes after the Tathāgata he does not take after him in anything.”
This is teaching that just like the suchness of the Tathāgata, the suchness of all dharmas is also not broken apart because in its nature it cannot be apprehended. And just like the suchness of all dharmas, so too the suchness of the elder Subhūti is also not broken apart because, in its nature, it cannot be apprehended. The suchness of the Tathāgata is not other than the suchness of all phenomena, and what is not other than the suchness of all phenomena is never not suchness, because the suchness of all phenomena is there at all times. The suchness  of the Tathāgata is not other than that, so it is there at all times. Similarly, the suchness of the elder Subhūti is not other than the suchness of all dharmas so it is there at all times. Therefore, since it is there at all times, he takes after the suchness of the Tathāgata. 
Because he is not marked by birth, it also says “he does not take after him in anything.”
“Just as the suchness of the Tathāgata is not past, is not future, and is not present,”
and so on, teaches that just as the Tathāgata with a falsely imagined nature is incorporated in the three time periods, but suchness is not included within time, so too all dharmas with a falsely imagined nature are incorporated in the three time periods but their suchness is not included within time. In the same way the suchness of the elder Subhūti is not included within time either.
“Therefore, [he]… ‘takes after the Tathāgata.’ ”
“Gods, here you should know the suchness of the Tathāgata that is the same, through the suchness of the past that is the same.”
This is teaching: Thus, because the past suchness of all past phenomena has the same intrinsic nature it is the same, and therefore all tathāgatas are the same as well. They too have the same nature as that suchness, so they are also the same. Because of just this—the suchness of all the tathāgatas being the same—the suchness of past phenomena is therefore also the same. And why? Because the suchness of the Tathāgata and the suchness of all phenomena are the same. Through the sameness of the suchness of all phenomena you should know the sameness of the suchness of the Tathāgata. Through the sameness  of the suchness of the Tathāgata you should know the sameness of all past phenomena. Construe the others in the same way as well.
“On account of the sameness of the dharma of form,”
and so on, teaches just that suchness of all phenomena in detail.
“Gods, thanks to this perfect suchness the Tathāgata… gets to be called Tathāgata.”
As it has been said,
 “ ‘Tathāgata,’ Subhūti, is a word for true suchness.”
Shaking of the universe
“Shook in six ways”—
the six are
“quaked… shook… stirred… resounded… roared… and was disturbed.”
From them, when each has been subdivided into three based on small, middling, and big, there are the eighteen great omens and, based on the six directions rising up and sinking down, there are twelve to do with the directions. I have already discussed them in the Introduction chapter.
 There that “shaking” and so on comes about from two causes. When powerful gods hear the good doctrine, because of the force of the pleasure and delight that arises they dance around and excite each other; and, because of the force of the true dharmic nature, even the stable world, in order to demonstrate the greatness of the doctrine, becomes a demonstration, as it were, of obedience to the true dharmic nature the tathāgatas of the past have explained. 
 There shaking is a great quaking in one region;stirring is stirring in its entirety like a leafy tree; quaking is revolving like a fire brand swirling around; resounding is the noise of a long and drawn-out sound; disturbing is upsetting; and a roar is a piercing sound. Alternatively, the earth shakes; all the trees stir; all mountains quake; the big drum of the gods and so on resounds; the ocean and so on is disturbed;  and peals of thunder roar. Again, when they first occur, they appear soft and not forceful; after that they are more forceful than that; and finally they are much more forceful even than that, hence subdivided into three they become eighteen. 
 When the directions are raised up and so on simultaneously, they become greatly disturbed, as though the boundaries have burst and been destroyed. Hence, they rise up and sink down in a sequence. There when the ground, trees, and mountains and so on in the eastern direction are greatly disturbed it looks like the eastern direction is raised up. When it looks like the eastern direction is raised up, even though the western direction remains in its natural state it looks like it has sunk down. When the ground, trees, and mountains and so on in the western direction are greatly disturbed it looks like the western direction is raised up. When it looks like the western direction is raised up, even though the eastern direction remains in its natural state it looks like it has sunk down. Connect them all like that. 
Synonyms of suchness
“Does not take after form, does not take after anything other than form”—
since a form aggregate that might come into being is nonexistent, the elder is also nonexistent, so it is not feasible that he takes after form or takes after anything else at all other than form. And it is not feasible that he takes after 
“the suchness of form,”
or takes after anything at all 
“other than the suchness of form,”
because suchness is unconnected with being born as well.
“Lord, suchness, unmistaken suchness, unaltered suchness are deep,”
and so on. To be a tathāgata is suchness. To be unmistaken is unmistaken suchness. To be unaltered is unaltered suchness. It says “suchness, unmistaken suchness, and unaltered suchness” because the thoroughly established phenomenon marked by the inexpressibility of dharmas, the ultimate element,  is at all times suchness, is not a mistake, and does not alter. The mark of the thoroughly established phenomenon is threefold: it is a thoroughly established phenomenon that is indestructible, it is a thoroughly established phenomenon without error, and it is a thoroughly established phenomenon that does not alter. It is suchness because it is a thoroughly established phenomenon that is indestructible; it is unmistaken suchness because it is a thoroughly established phenomenon without error; and it is unaltered suchness because it is a thoroughly established phenomenon that does not alter. 
 The three terms—
“true nature of dharmas, dharma-constituent, and establishment of dharmas”—
teach three marks: the mark of the dharma, the mark of the origin, and the mark of what is established. 
 The state of the dharma is the attribute that is the true nature. It is in a form different from all falsely imagined and conceptualized attributes, so that which is established as the state of the dharma, dissimilar to them, and inexpressible, is expressed by the name “true nature of dharmas” because it is established.
 “Dharma-constituent” is said to mark the origin. The “dharmas” are the ten powers, the fearlessnesses, the distinct attributes of a buddha, and so on. The term element means cause, so, because it is the origin of the buddhadharmas, it is the “dharma-constituent,” which is to say, the “dharma body.”
 “Establishment of dharmas” is said to mark what is established. As it is said, “Whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, the true nature of dharmas and establishment of dharmas are indeed established.”  Because it is the inexpressible ultimate, the dharma that is thoroughly established, constantly there during the prior period when it is together with stains and also during the later period when there are no stains, it is the establishment of dharmas.
 The three terms—
“the certification of dharmas, the very limit of reality, and the inconceivable element”—
are speaking about what is marked by restriction.
 Among these, in “the certification of dharmas”  the dharmas are the perfect state dharmas, the reverse of the mistaken dharmas. The certification of them is the state in which they are secure, the state restricted to those alone. Through that state they awaken to suchness at the very first with knowledge at the Joyful level and are certified to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, not otherwise. Therefore, it is called the “certification of dharmas” because it is the cause restricting dharmas (the perfections and so on making up a buddha) to the perfect state, because it said, “Those who have entered into the flawlessness that is a perfect state…”
 Alternatively, the “flaw” is craving for the dharmas. The nonexistence of the flaw is the flawlessness as explained before. The flawlessness in respect to dharmas is the “certification of dharmas.” The “certification of dharmas” (dharma flawlessness) is the dharma, by awakening to which flawed dharmas are cut off. 
 As for “the very limit of reality,” because it is the “limit” (what stands at the limit) of “reality” (in the sense of true reality), it means the true reality that has been absolutely determined to be at the limit of reality. 
 “The inconceivable element” is an inconceivable entity. It is not within the range of what can be inferred by any ordinary speculative thought, so the absolutely determined ultimate known by self-reflexive analytic knowledge is called the “inconceivable element.” Alternatively, it is the element of what is inconceivable, because it is the cause of the amazing, marvelous, inconceivable attributes, which is to say, through the power of the body of the attributes of the buddhas and bodhisattvas the amazing miracles appear in the world. 
“In them you cannot apprehend form, you cannot apprehend the suchness of form.”
Phenomena, form and so on, do not exist, so you cannot apprehend them. As for suchness, during the period when apprehended and apprehender are in the same state, you cannot apprehend it because that which might be grasped and a grasper do not exist.  Alternatively, that is said because form and suchness are the terms used just during the periods together with stains and when there are no stains.
 An exegesis of the clear realization of the dharmas is not given because it is easy to explain.
Sixty bodhisattvas lacking in what is necessary stopped taking hold of anything and their minds were freed from contamination.
Why are those bodhisattvas lacking in what is necessary? It is because, separated from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means, those bodhisattvas practiced a practice of six perfections that can be apprehended and therefore 
“did not enter into secure state,”
and so they did not make unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening their achievement. Hence, they will actualize the very limit of reality and become worthy ones. Those who do just that meditation on 
“emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness… separated from skillful means… become śrāvakas,”
while those who are not so separated reach unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. 
He asks “why?” and is taught with the illustration of “a bird,” and there is an explanation of skillful means. It is easy to understand.
Is it hard or not hard to become awakened?
 Then, in regard to the statement, 
“Lord,” said the elder Śāriputra, “the way I understand the meaning of what you, Lord, have said,”
it is teaching that on account of their particular lineage they have wisdom and skillful means, their nonapprehending awareness arises from that, and with those everything is achieved.
“Starting from the production of the first thought” 
means starting from the first level.
“Gods! Even though I have fully awakened to all dharmas in all their aspects, still I did not apprehend any dharma that might fully awaken, or through which  I might fully awaken, or any dharma I might awaken to.”
This means he fully knows all the dharmas that have been brought together in a conventional state of consciousness—the knowledge of a knower of all aspects—but when they are investigated with the knowledge of the ultimate, like seeing things in a dream, he does not see any dharma that knows or that might be known.
“And why? Gods, it is because all dharmas are absolutely pure.” 
Here the “pure” is just the nonexistent thing, in the sense of absolutely nonexistent. 
“Lord… full awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is not hard.”
All dharmas are nonexistent, that is, are nonexistent things, so it is not hard to realize that a nonexistent thing is a nonexistent thing. It is hard to correctly realize the defining marks of phenomena that exist. When something is nonexistent, knowing and establishing that it is simply a nonexistent thing is not hard, even though it would be were dharmas to have such an existence and were you to have to accomplish the practice of the perfections and so on to increase the bright dharmas and stop the dark dharmas. But because those dharmas do not exist, therefore even the accomplishment of them is not hard. So, he says “full awakening… is not hard.”
 The elder Śāriputra’s intention in saying full awakening 
“must be hard”
is this: Having understood that the intrinsic nature of all phenomena that are nonexistent things is a nonexistent thing, like space, then, if it were enough to remain silent in that case it would not be hard. But having thus come to understand that ultimately even full awakening to all dharmas does not exist, and yet, after that still making an effort at the practices of the perfections and working at becoming  fully awakened to all dharmas—that sort of thing is hard. That is what he intends. 
“If bodhisattva great beings do not believe that dharmas are like space, but still,”
and so on, teaches that if they were not to “believe all dharmas,” because they are nonexistent, “are like space, but still” they could reach awakening, in that case it would be easy, 
“it would not be hard.”
And if that were the case, even in the world, bodhisattva great beings who have not eliminated the notion that something is being apprehended, who are practicing the six perfections, would not turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and would not fall to the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha level. This is teaching that in fact those who practice while apprehending things like that will not fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and therefore that full awakening to just those dharmas by seeing that just those dharmas are absolutely nonexistent things is hard. 
Having said this, the elder Subhūti, impatient with his statement that bodhisattva great beings turn back from perfect, complete awakening, says, 
“Venerable Śāriputra, what do you think, does form turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
and so on. Here again it teaches six ways it could happen: You can suppose that a dharma, form and so on, turns back; or a dharma other than form turns back; or some dharma that is the suchness of the dharmas, form and so on with stains, turns back; or some dharma other than the suchness of form and so on turns back; or absolutely pure, stainless suchness turns back; or some dharma other than that turns back. Given that it could not happen in those six ways,  what truly established dharma is there that will turn back? This is teaching that ultimately, therefore, there is nothing at all that turns back. 
 With
“according to the way things are in the elder Subhūti’s teaching,”
and so on, the elder Śāriputra is saying that if there are no bodhisattvas who turn back from progress toward awakening, in that case all bodhisattvas will become buddhas; they will not turn back to become śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, having in mind that were that to be the case there would not be the three types of bodhisattvas where it says “the bodhisattva is threefold.” He questions Subhūti with the elder Pūrṇa’s words, and then the elder Subhūti, impatient with the words “the bodhisattva is threefold” says,
“Venerable Śāriputra, do you accept in suchness there are three bodhisattvas?”
and so on. As already explained before, from the perspective of suchness all childish ordinary persons, all noble persons, those with a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, bodhisattvas, and even buddhas are just simply one, there is no difference among them. This is explaining that if, even while all are thus just simply one, you accept that bodhisattvas are of three types, then how, given that suchness is totally without difference, can it be feasible to divide it into 
“one… or two… or three”
subdivisions?
Then the Lord says to the elder Subhūti that he should know that those bodhisattvas will go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and in that context, for the sake of those in the retinue who want to know the defining marks of those who will succeed in going forth, Subhūti asks,
“Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings who want  to go forth to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening stand?”
After that there is the explanation that they stand with a fully complete aspiration and a fully complete practice. The fully complete aspiration is from
“I must produce a balanced thought toward all beings,”
up to
“I must focus on all beings with the thought they are kinsmen, and blood relatives.”
And the fully complete practice is from
“I must also stop killing,”
up to
“the good doctrine lasts, welcoming it.”
Then there are the two results from the practice: the absence of obscuration and the absence of seizing. 
The “I must produce a balanced thought toward all beings” is from the perspective of the suchness of all dharmas. 
“Form will be without obscuration”
means they do not obscure or conceptualize form.
“Even in the past… did not seize form.”
Even in times past there was no obscuration of form and so on and they did not seize it. Having said “it is because they did not seize,” and so on, it then says,
“and why?”
asking, for the sake of those who are uncertain, how they “did not seize form” and so on.
“Because even that form that has not been seized, Subhūti, is not form.”
Bodhisattvas cause just not seizing on all dharmas to get stronger, not seizing. But even that which bodhisattvas do not seize is not the intrinsic nature of form and so on. Therefore, when not seizing has gotten stronger, form and so on will not be seized on by bodhisattvas.
Signs of bodhisattvas irreversible from progress toward awakening
 Then, because the elder Subhūti has earlier said that ultimately even turning back does not exist, and the three types of bodhisattva do not exist either, here, in this part of the text,  he asks about the signs that they are irreversible from progress toward awakening. Then the Lord gives an explanation of thirty-five signs: because irreversible bodhisattvas
see without duality in suchness;have turned away from all; do not honor and so on other teachers or have a doctrine that is not inferior;are not born in a place that precludes a perfect human birth;stop the ten unwholesome actions;complete the ten wholesome actions;complete all the perfections for the sake of all beings;study the doctrine—the twelve branches of the sacred word—for the sake of all beings;are not unsure about the deep dharmas;are endowed with gentle and loving physical, verbal, and thinking-mind actions;do not put up with the five obscurations;do not have the seven bad proclivities;act with mindfulness and a clear awareness of what they are doing;are habitually clean and so on;are those bodhisattvas in whom the thousands of maggot families do not arise;have a pure body, pure speech, and a pure mind;are not needy, are content, and rely on the qualities of the ascetic;are not miserly and so on;have a steady, profound intellect and so on;are not stolen away by Māra and so on;do not repose their confidence in others;rely on the perfection of wisdom;comprehend the works of Māra;have gained forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas;have turned back and are irreversible from progress toward awakening;are not affected by the results of the concentrations, meditative stabilizations, or absorptions; do not focus on all dharmas, form and so on;have the perfect four practices of the perfections;do not hope the result of giving is that others become distressed and so on;have the faculties such that the five vajra families are always shadowing them and so on;do not resort to spells and base arts;stop being preoccupied with base stories and engage in perfect deeds  and aspirations;harbor no doubt about their own level;will give up even their life to look after the doctrine; anddo not lose the doctrines they have taken up.
Among them, 
“in regard to those suchnesses, they have no doubt at all that they are not each separate and both.”
This is explaining, based on the suchness of all persons, that the tathāgatas are exactly the same. It means the intrinsic nature, or the intrinsic nature of both, is not the intrinsic nature of suchness.
“All dharmas are without attributes, without tokens, and without signs”
because suchness has no attributes.
“Lord, if all dharmas are without attributes,”
and so on, means that if you say there are no attributes and no signs how have you explained the attributes and signs of those who are irreversible from progress toward awakening? 
“Subhūti… bodhisattva great beings who have turned away from form,”
and so on, is teaching that just the knowledge, in the absence of the attribute, is the reason they are irreversible from progress toward awakening. They have “turned away from” an attribute of form, from what is a token of form. 
“Know what needs to be known”— 
know the knowable;
“see what needs to be seen”—
see what needs to be looked at.
“They do not hold that a spectacle or an auspicious sign makes for cleanliness.” 
An auspicious spectacle or auspicious sign means that just because they think so, [purification] has been done by bathing, fasting, chanting, visiting holy places, ceremonial offerings, and so on. 
 The explanation of all the tokens of irreversibility is easy. 
 It is true that not turning back from progress toward full awakening happens just by reaching the first level, but it also teaches a second not turning back from progress toward full awakening that happens at the eighth level.
 As for those who “turn back” and are “irreversible,” those who turn back from the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels “turn back”; those who do not turn back from the Buddha level are “irreversible from progress toward full awakening.” 
Part Two
Subhūti’s Two Hundred and Seventy-Seven Questions
 Having thus heard about the good qualities of irreversible bodhisattvas not turning back, the elder Subhūti asks about the deep places for the benefit of bodhisattvas who want to be irreversible from progress toward full awakening and says
“would that you might also well expound those deep places.”
 From here on the elder Subhūti asks two hundred and seventy-seven questions about the deep places and the Lord provides the responses.
 The first is “would that you might also well expound those deep places.”
 The second is, 
“Lord, are they words only for nirvāṇa or are they words for all dharmas?”
and so on.
 The third is, 
“Lord, what is the suchness of form like?”
and so on. 
 The fourth is,
“The Lord has said, ‘Whatever merit has been accumulated it is all imaginary,’ so how will a son of a good family or daughter of a good family make a lot of merit?”
and so on.
 The fifth is,
“Lord, what are the specific features of incalculable, infinite, and immeasurable?”
and so on.
 The sixth is,
“Lord, would there also be a way such that form would also be incalculable?”
and so on. 
 The seventh is, 
“Lord, is it just that form is empty?”
and so on.
 The eighth is,
“Lord, does an inexpressible reality know increase or decrease?”
and so on. 
 The ninth is, 
“Lord, if an inexpressible reality does not increase or decrease, will the perfection of giving, Lord, not increase or decrease?”
and so on. 
 The tenth is, 
“Lord, what is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 The eleventh is, 
“What is the suchness of all phenomena?”
 The twelfth is,
“Lord, do  bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because of the first production of the thought?”
and so on.
 The thirteenth is, 
“Lord, do bodhisattva great beings, having completed all the ten levels, fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
and so on.
 The fourteenth is, 
“How, Lord, when they do so, will bodhisattva great beings become absorbed for the sake of beings in the three meditative stabilizations?”
 The fifteenth is, 
“How do bodhisattva great beings complete the perfection of wisdom?”
 The sixteenth is, 
“How do bodhisattva great beings fully master emptiness?”
 The seventeenth is, 
“How do bodhisattva great beings stand in emptiness but not actualize emptiness?”
 The eighteenth is, 
“Lord, what is the mark of the perfection of wisdom?”
 The nineteenth is, 
“Lord, if all phenomena are isolated from all phenomena and if all phenomena are empty of all phenomena, Lord, how could there be the defilement and purification of beings?”
 The twentieth is, 
“Lord, given that all attention is separated from an intrinsic nature, that all attention is empty of an intrinsic nature, how, Lord, are bodhisattva great beings never separated from attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The twenty-first is, 
“Lord, given that the perfection of wisdom is separated from an intrinsic nature, how will bodhisattva great beings succeed at the perfection of wisdom and fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 The twenty-second is, 
“Lord, is it the emptiness of the perfection of wisdom, its state of ringing hollow, being in vain [that practices the perfection of wisdom]?”
 At this point there is a subsection with ten questions.
 The twenty-third is, 
“Lord, is the bodhisattvas’ unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening prophesied because there will be the production of all the dharmas?”
 The twenty-fourth is,
“Lord, what is the sameness of bodhisattva great beings?”
 The twenty-fifth is,
“Lord, when bodhisattva great beings train to put an end to form do they train in the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The twenty-sixth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are in their basic nature perfectly pure, what dharma’s perfect purity do bodhisattva great beings attain?” 
 The twenty-seventh is,
“Lord, do they even have to obtain a śrāvaka’s and a pratyekabuddha’s perfect state?”
 The twenty-eighth is,
“Lord, in what way will a thought that is like an illusion fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 The twenty-ninth is,
“How will there be a realization of the isolated by the isolated?”
 The thirtieth is,
“Lord, do those lord buddhas teach the Dharma in the form of a proclamation of the names of those bodhisattva great beings who turn back or those who do not turn back?”
 The thirty-first is,
“Lord, given that no phenomenon is apprehended when they have stood in suchness and practiced for suchness, how will they stand in the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The thirty-second is,
“Lord, given that no dharma called ‘a tathāgata’s magical creation’ is apprehended at all, who will stand in suchness?”
 The thirty-third is,
“Lord, how are they to accomplish the perfection of wisdom?”
 The thirty-fourth is,
“Lord, how does the perfection of giving reach completion in bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom?”
 The thirty-fifth is,
“How do bodhisattva great beings standing in the perfection of giving incorporate the perfection of morality?”
 The thirty-sixth is,
“How do they, standing in the perfection of giving, incorporate the perfection of patience?”
 The thirty-seventh is,
“How the perfection of perseverance?”
 The thirty-eighth is,
“How the perfection of concentration?”
 The thirty-ninth is,
“How the perfection of wisdom?”
 The fortieth is,
“How do they, standing in the perfection of morality, incorporate the perfection of giving?”
 The forty-first is,
“How the perfection of patience?” 
 The forty-second is,
“How the perfection of perseverance?”
 The forty-third is,
“How the perfection of concentration?”
 The forty-fourth is,
“How the perfection of wisdom?”
 The forty-fifth is,
“How do they, standing in the perfection of patience, incorporate the perfection of giving?”
 The forty-sixth is,
“How the perfection of morality?”
 The forty-seventh is,
“How the perfection of perseverance?”
 The forty-eighth is,
“How the perfection of concentration?”
 The forty-ninth is, 
“How the perfection of wisdom?”
 The fiftieth is,
“How do they, standing in the perfection of perseverance, incorporate the perfection of giving?”
 The fifty-first is,
“How the perfection of morality?”
 The fifty-second is,
“How the perfection of patience?”
 The fifty-third is,
“How the perfection of concentration?”
 The fifty-fourth is,
“How the perfection of wisdom?”
 The fifty-fifth is,
“How do they, standing in the perfection of concentration, incorporate the perfection of giving?”
 The fifty-sixth is,
“How the perfection of morality?”
 The fifty-seventh is,
“How the perfection of patience?”
 The fifty-eighth is,
“How the perfection of perseverance?”
 The fifty-ninth is,
“How the perfection of wisdom?”
 The sixtieth is,
“How do they, standing in the perfection of wisdom, incorporate the perfection of giving?”
 The sixty-first is,
“How the perfection of morality?”
 The sixty-second is,
“How the perfection of patience?”
 The sixty-third is,
“How the perfection of perseverance?”
 The sixty-fourth is,
“How the perfection of concentration?” 
 The sixty-fifth is, 
“How long a time has it been since bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means set out?”
 The sixty-sixth is, 
“Lord, how many lord buddhas have the bodhisattva great beings with such skillful means attended on?”
 The sixty-seventh is, 
“How large is the wholesome root they have planted?”
 The sixty-eighth is, 
“Lord, if all phenomena are empty of an intrinsic nature how will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving and so on fully awaken?”
 The sixty-ninth is, 
“Lord, given there is no specific feature or variation of any phenomenon for someone who has entered into reality, why is the perfection of wisdom said to be the highest… when it comes to the five perfections?”
 The seventieth is, 
“Lord, does the perfection of wisdom not fully take hold of or release any dharma?”
 The seventy-first is, 
“Lord, how is form not taken hold of and not released?”
 The seventy-second is, 
“Lord, if there is no attention being paid to form, how will the wholesome roots flourish?”
 The seventy-third is, 
“Lord, why, when they thus do not pay attention to form, do they reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The seventy-fourth is, 
“Lord, where will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom stand?”
 The seventy-fifth is, 
“Lord, how will they not stand in form?”
 The seventy-sixth is, 
“Lord, how will these faults of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom not occur?” 
 The seventy-seventh is, 
“Lord, is the perfection of wisdom not separated from the perfection of wisdom?”
 The seventy-eighth is, 
“Lord, what is the path of bodhisattva great beings, and what is not the path?”
 The seventy-ninth is, 
“Lord, if the perfection of wisdom does not produce and does not stop any phenomenon, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom give gifts?”
 The eightieth is, 
“Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings make an effort at the six perfections?”
 The eighty-first is,
“Lord, have you said that they have to train in the perfection of wisdom with the perfection of wisdom?”
 The eighty-second is, 
“Lord, how do the lord buddhas watch over those practicing the perfection of giving?”
 The eighty-third is, 
“Lord, how will bodhisattva great beings come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail?”
 The eighty-fourth is, 
“Lord, what is the suchness of form?”
 The eighty-fifth is, 
“Lord, what is the very limit of reality?”
 The eighty-sixth is, 
“Lord, how should all dharmas be known in brief and in detail?”
 The eighty-seventh is, 
“Lord, what are the dharmas that are not conjoined and are not disjoined?”
 The eighty-eighth is, 
“Lord, how should bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 The eighty-ninth is, 
“Lord, for bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom, how long is it?” 
 The ninetieth is, 
“Lord, should they practice connected with an unbroken, unseparated thought?”
 The ninety-first is,
“Lord, will bodhisattva great beings who have practiced the perfection of wisdom, accomplished the perfection of wisdom, and meditated on the perfection of wisdom reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
In this “Lord, how will bodhisattvas reach the knowledge of all aspects?” part of the text, there are four questions in a subsection.
 The ninety-second is,
“Lord, is the perfection of wisdom something that cannot be labeled?”
 The ninety-third is,
“Why, Lord, does hell have a label?”
 The ninety-fourth is,
“Well then, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom train in form?”
 The ninety-fifth is,
“Lord, how should they train in form as not produced and not stopping?”
 The ninety-sixth is,
“Lord, how should they train in all dharmas empty of their own marks?”
 The ninety-seventh is,
“Lord, if form is empty of form, how will bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 The ninety-eighth is,
“Lord, why is not practicing the practice of the perfection of wisdom?”
 The ninety-ninth is,
“Lord, if not practicing is the practice of the perfection of wisdom, how then will bodhisattva great beings who are beginning the work practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 The one hundredth is,
“Lord, to what extent does not apprehending come about?”
 From here on down are the second hundred. 
 The first is,
“Lord, what is duality?”
 The second is,
“Lord, what is nonduality?”
 The third is,
“Lord, is what cannot be apprehended not apprehended?”
 The fourth is,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom  are not attached to apprehending and are not attached to not apprehending, how, Lord, will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom complete level after level, and how, having completed level after level, will they reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The fifth is, 
“Lord, if a perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended, how will bodhisattvas… make an investigation?”
 The sixth is,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom do not apprehend form, … how will they complete the perfection of giving… and having done the work of a buddha free all beings from saṃsāra?”
 The seventh is,
“Well then, Lord, for whose sake do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 The eighth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are unmade and are unchanging, how is there an arrangement of three vehicles?”
 The ninth is,
“Lord, if a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha were not to apprehend with the five eyes those beings they free from saṃsāra, how then would the Lord… have predicted beings in the three groups…?”
 The tenth is,
“But Lord, the tathāgatas stood in the ultimate and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect complete awakening.”
 The eleventh is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are like magical creations, then what distinction and what differentiation, Lord, is there between a tathāgata and a magical creation?”
 The twelfth is,
“Lord, when there is no tathāgata, does the tathāgata’s magical creation do the work?”
 The thirteenth is,
“Lord, if there is no distinction at all between a magical creation and a tathāgata, how will there be a pure gift?” 
 The fourteenth is,
“Lord, the true dharmic nature of all dharmas should not be made complicated, but has the Lord not complicated the true dharmic nature of all dharmas?”
 The fifteenth is,
“Lord, if the Lord has taught the true dharmic nature of dharmas and explained dharmas with words and signs in order that others will comprehend, why, Lord, have you given an explanation in words and signs of dharmas that have no names and have no signs?”
 The sixteenth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas finish as a mere name and sign, well then, for what do bodhisattva great beings produce the thought to be awakened?”
 The seventeenth is,
“Lord, you say ‘knowledge of all aspects’ again and again?”
 The eighteenth is,
“Lord, what distinction is there between these three types of omniscience?” 
 The nineteenth is,
“Lord, why does the knowledge of all aspects belong to tathāgatas?”
 The twentieth is,
“Lord, why does the knowledge of path aspects belong to bodhisattva great beings?”
 The twenty-first is,
“Why does all-knowledge belong to śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas?”
 The twenty-second is,
“Lord, from among the three types of omniscience, is there a difference in the elimination of afflictions by them such that it is said, ‘with its abandonment there is something left over,’ but ‘with its abandonment there is nothing left over.’?”
 The twenty-third is,
“Lord, before these śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas have reached the uncompounded, have they eliminated afflictions?”
 The twenty-fourth is,
“Lord, are differences apprehended in the uncompounded?”
 The twenty-fifth is,
“Lord, if differences are not apprehended in the uncompounded, why does the Lord say, ‘This is an abandonment of residual impressions and connections. This is not an abandonment of residual impressions and connections?”
 The twenty-sixth is,
“Lord, does a bodhisattva great being having stood on the path…?”
In this part of the text, in a sub-section, there are four questions.
 The twenty-seventh is,
“Lord, if the path is not an existent thing and nirvāṇa is not an existent thing, why is it taught that ‘this is a stream enterer’?”
 The twenty-eighth is,
“Lord, does something uncompounded make the category ‘this is a stream enterer’?”
 The twenty-ninth is,
“Lord, how will there be a later limit to saṃsāra?”
 The thirtieth is,
“Lord, if in all phenomena empty of their own marks a prior limit is not apprehended, what need is there to say more about a later limit?”
 The thirty-first is,
“Lord, you say ‘perfection of wisdom’ again and again. Why, Lord, is it called ‘perfection of wisdom’?”
 The thirty-second is,
“Lord, if a meaning and a method are not found in this perfection of wisdom, how can bodhisattva great beings practice this deep perfection of wisdom’s meaning?” 
 The thirty-third is,
“Lord, why does the perfection of wisdom not do good and not do bad?”
 The thirty-fourth is,
“But Lord, the uncompounded is good for all noble ones, is it not?”
 The thirty-fifth is,
“Lord, having trained in the uncompounded perfection of wisdom, do bodhisattva great beings not reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The thirty-sixth is,
“Lord, does a nondual dharma…?”
In this part of the text, in a subsection, there are three questions.
 The thirty-seventh is,
“Lord, how much merit do bodhisattva great beings make, who have produced the first thought, and who want to fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the sake of all beings?”
 The thirty-eighth is,
“Lord, what should bodhisattva great beings who have produced the first thought pay attention to?”
 The thirty-ninth is,
“Lord, what is the objective support of the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The fortieth is,
“Lord, is only the knowledge of all aspects a nonexistent thing?”
 The forty-first is,
“Lord, why does the knowledge of all aspects have no intrinsic nature?”
 The forty-second is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, with what skillful means do bodhisattva great beings, who have produced the first thought of awakening, practice the perfection of giving?”
 The forty-third is,
“Lord, are phenomena separated from the phenomena themselves?”
 The forty-fourth is,
“Lord, is ordinary convention one thing and the ultimate another?”
 The forty-fifth is,
“Lord, you say ‘bodhisattva’s practice’ again and again, what are the words bodhisattva’s practice for?”
 The forty-sixth is, 
“Lord, you say ‘buddha’ again and again…?”
 The forty-seventh is, 
“Lord, you say ‘awakening’ again and again…?”
 The forty-eighth is,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings who practice for this awakening practice the six perfections… what wholesome root of theirs will be accumulated or diminished, decreased or increased, produced or stopped, or defiled or purified?”
 The forty-ninth is,
“Lord, if the awakening of bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom is not available as any dharma in the manner of an objective support, how will bodhisattvas… fully grasp the perfection of giving?”
 The fiftieth is,
“If… in a dualistic way…?”
 The fifty-first is,
“Lord, do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of wholesome roots?”
 The fifty-second is,
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings who have attended on the lord buddhas… gain the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The fifty-third is,
“Lord, those bodhisattva great beings would not gain the knowledge of all aspects, would they?”
 The fifty-fourth is,
“Lord, why would even bodhisattva great beings who attend on the lord buddhas… not gain the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The fifty-fifth is,
“Lord, what are those skillful means, in possession of which bodhisattva great beings gain the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The fifty-sixth is,
“Lord, does a nonexistent thing fully awaken to a nonexistent thing?”
In this part of the text, in a subsection, there are four questions.
 The fifty-seventh is,
“Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ thought construction?”
 The fifty-eighth is,
“Lord, if no phenomenon at all can be apprehended as having an intrinsic nature, on what path do bodhisattva great beings enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva?”
 The fifty-ninth is,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva having completed all paths, in that case, Lord, given that the Aṣṭamaka path is different… how will bodhisattva great beings enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva having completed all paths?”
 The sixtieth is,
“Lord, how will bodhisattva great beings reach the knowledge of all aspects without having produced these paths?” 
 The sixty-first is,
“Lord, which is the bodhisattvas’ path of a knower of path aspects?”
 The sixty-second is,
“Lord, if those dharmas—the dharmas on the side of awakening and the awakening—[are not conjoined and not disjoined… how, Lord, will the dharmas on the side of awakening be those that bring about awakening]?”
 The sixty-third is,
“Lord, what are the dharmas bodhisattva great beings should realize, having trained in them by knowing and seeing?”
 The sixty-fourth is,
“Lord, you say ‘noble Dharma and Vinaya’ [again and again. Lord, what is the noble Dharma and Vinaya]?”
 The sixty-fifth is,
“Lord, should they not train in the mark of form?”
 The sixty-sixth is,
“If they should not train in the marks of those dharmas how, Lord, will bodhisattva great beings transcend the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels?”
 The sixty-seventh is, 
“Lord, if all dharmas are unmarked, do not have various marks, and do not have even one mark, how, Lord, will bodhisattva great beings meditate on the perfection of wisdom?”
 The sixty-eighth is, 
“Lord, in what way is meditation on the unmarked, meditation on the perfection of wisdom?”
 The sixty-ninth is,
“Lord, how is the disintegration of meditation on form, meditation on the perfection of wisdom?”
 The seventieth is,
“If, for someone with dualistic perception, there is not even the patience that arises in a natural order, how could there ever be the comprehension of form?”
 The seventy-first is,
“When bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, is there the notion of an existent thing or a nonexistent thing?”
 The seventy-second is, 
“Lord, what is an existent thing? What is a nonexistent thing?”
 The seventy-third is,
“Lord, what is duality? What is nonduality?”
 The seventy-fourth is,
“Lord, if all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature…?” 
 The seventy-fifth is, 
“Lord, how has a tathāgata, worthy one, perfect complete buddha produced the four concentrations that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature?”
 The seventy-sixth is, 
“How, even while all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, will there be serial action?”
 The seventy-seventh is, 
“Lord, if all phenomena are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, well then, there is no form…?”
 The seventy-eighth is, 
“Lord, if all dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, what reality do bodhisattva great beings who have set out for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening for the welfare of beings see?”
 The seventy-ninth is, 
“Lord, without an apprehended object is there attainment, is there clear realization?”
 The eightieth is,
“If just the absence of an apprehended object is attainment, just the absence of an apprehended object is clear realization… in that case, Lord, how will there be the bodhisattva great beings’ first level?”
 The eighty-first is, 
“Lord, what distinction and what differentiation is there between the absence of an apprehended object, and giving, morality…?”
 The eighty-second is, 
“Lord, how is an exposition made that differentiates between unapprehended giving, morality, patience, perseverance, concentration, wisdom, and the clairvoyances?”
 The eighty-third is, 
“How do they incorporate the six perfections in a single production of the thought?”
 The eighty-fourth is,
“How do they not, when giving a gift, have a dualistic notion?”
 The eighty-fifth is,
“Lord, given that all dharmas are without causal signs and do not occasion anything, how do bodhisattvas complete the perfection of giving and so on.”
 The eighty-sixth is,
“Lord, given that dharmas are without causal signs, how is it that bodhisattvas complete the cultivation of the six perfections?” 
 The eighty-seventh is, 
“Lord, what is forbearance for dharmas that are not produced?”
 The eighty-eighth is,
“Lord, … of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas?”
 The eighty-ninth is, 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings, having completed the perfection of meditative stabilization that has no mark, pass beyond the śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha levels?”
 The ninetieth is, 
“Lord, what is a… flaw and what is flawlessness?”
 The ninety-first is, 
“Lord, what is apprehending?”
 The ninety-second is, 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom comprehend that all phenomena are like a dream?”
 The ninety-third is, 
“Lord, if all dharmas are an unbroken unity, why is there an exposition of wholesome dharmas?”
 The ninety-fourth is, 
“Lord, how, when all dharmas are like a dream… can you present these as wholesome…?”
 The ninety-fifth is, 
“Lord, what is that amazing, marvelous dharma of bodhisattva great beings that śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas do not have?”
 The ninety-sixth is, 
“Subhūti, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing this perfection of wisdom gather a retinue of beings by giving?”
 The ninety-seventh is, 
“Lord, do bodhisattva great beings gain the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The ninety-eighth is,
“If a bodhisattva great being gains the knowledge of all aspects, what is the distinction to be made between a bodhisattva great being and a tathāgata?”
 The ninety-ninth is, 
“Lord, if, because of the emptinesses of what transcends limits and no beginning and no end, a being absolutely cannot be apprehended… how, Lord, do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom arisen from maturation… teach the Dharma to beings?”
 The one hundredth is, 
“Lord, if, in that case, in the dharma-constituent, there is no going beyond,  and in suchness and at the very limit of reality there is no going beyond, well then, is form one thing and the dharma-constituent another?”
 From here on down are the third hundred. 
 The first is,
“Lord, when they have become habituated to the path does the result appear, and do they attain the result or not attain the result?”
 The second is,
“Lord, if the results have not been presented in detail by curbing the compounded element and uncompounded element… Lord, how am I to understand what you have said, Lord, that ‘the results have not been presented in detail by curbing the compounded and uncompounded dharmas’?”
 The third is,
“Lord, how have bodhisattva great beings realized well what marks dharmas as dharmas?”
 The fourth is,
“Lord, how does a magical creation meditate on the path?”
 The fifth is,
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings realize all dharmas that are not real things?”
 The sixth is,
“Lord, is all form like a tathāgata’s magical creation?”
 The seventh is,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings know… all phenomena are like an illusion, then for whose sake do they practice the six perfections?”
 The eighth is,
“Lord, if all phenomena are like a dream, where are beings such that by practicing the perfection of wisdom bodhisattva great beings cause them to advance beyond that location?”
 The ninth is,
“Lord, what is a name, and what is a causal sign?”
 The tenth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas end up as simply that, how will bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom become personally special on account of wholesome dharmas?”
 The eleventh is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are without signs, without mindfulness… how do you enumerate ‘these are dharmas with outflows’?”
 The twelfth is,
“Lord, how, in what sort of way, do bodhisattva great beings train in the five appropriating aggregates?”
 The thirteenth is,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom are aware in that way of those dharmas that are different from each other, well then, Lord, does that not complicate the dharma-constituent?”
 The fourteenth is,
“Lord, in what are bodhisattva great beings  training in the dharma-constituent trained?”
 The fifteenth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are the dharma-constituent, how should bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom?”
 The sixteenth is,
“Lord, if a being is absolutely not apprehended… for whose sake do bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom?”
 The seventeenth is,
“Lord, if the very limit of reality is thus not one thing and the limit of beings is not another…?”
 The eighteenth is,
“Lord, what are the skillful means in possession of which bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom with skillful means…?”
 The nineteenth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are empty of a basic nature…?”
 The twentieth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are not different things, well then, for what will bodhisattva great beings, thinking, ‘I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ set out?”
 The twenty-first is,
“Lord, if a bodhisattva great being’s awakening is not a practice of taking anything up and is not a practice of not taking anything up, well then, of what is a bodhisattva great being’s awakening a practice?”
 The twenty-second is,
“Lord, if bodhisattva great beings do not practice taking anything up or not taking anything up, do not practice form… how will bodhisattva great beings… fully awaken to the knowledge of all aspects?”
 The twenty-third is,
“The ten bodhisattva levels…?”
 The twenty-fourth is, 
“Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ path on which bodhisattva great beings who have to purify a buddhafield and bring beings to maturity practice?”
 The twenty-fifth is, 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving bring beings to maturity?”
 The twenty-sixth is, 
“What is the path of a bodhisattva?”
 The twenty-seventh is, 
“Lord, if all dharmas are empty, how will bodhisattva great beings train in all dharmas?” 
 The twenty-eighth is, 
“Lord, why are they not located?”
 The twenty-ninth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are unproduced, how will bodhisattva great beings produce a path to awakening?”
 The thirtieth is, 
“Lord, whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise, does the true dharmic nature of dharmas not remain?”
 The thirty-first is,
“Lord, do they reach awakening on that path that has been produced?”
Here, in a subsection, there are five questions.
 The thirty-second is,
“Lord, if just awakening is the path, would not bodhisattva great beings already have reached awakening?”
 The thirty-third is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are isolated from their own intrinsic nature, well then, Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings purify a buddhafield?”
 The thirty-fourth is,
“Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ final physical basis of suffering?”
 The thirty-fifth is,
“Lord, are bodhisattva great beings ‘destined’?”
 The thirty-sixth is,
“Lord, to which group is one destined?”
 The thirty-seventh is,
“Lord, are bodhisattva great beings who have produced the first thought destined, or are those who are irreversible destined, or are those who are in a last existence destined?”
 The thirty-eighth is,
“Lord, do bodhisattva great beings who have become destined take birth in terrible forms of life?”
 The thirty-ninth is,
“Lord, if destined bodhisattva great beings do not take birth in those places—namely, the negative ones—then where were those wholesome roots when the Tathāgata took birth in the animal world, as you personally have taught in your birth stories?”
 The fortieth is,
“Lord, in which wholesome dharmas do bodhisattva great beings stand when they appropriate such a body?”
 The forty-first is,
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings endowed with the bright dharmas take birth in terrible forms of life or in the animal world?”
 The forty-second is,
“Lord, is a tathāgata a noble being without outflows?” 
 The forty-third is,
“Lord, standing in those bright dharmas, do bodhisattva great beings utilize such skillful means but still are not affected by those actions?”
 The forty-fourth is,
“Lord, do bodhisattva great beings  stand only in the perfection of wisdom but not in other dharmas?”
 The forty-fifth is,
“Lord, if the perfection of wisdom is empty of an intrinsic nature, how could all dharmas be included in the perfection of wisdom?”
 The forty-sixth is,
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings… find and produce within themselves the perfection of clairvoyance?”
 The forty-seventh is,
“Lord, what are the paths for fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 The forty-eighth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are empty of their own marks, how can you apprehend specific features in all dharmas that are empty of their own marks and make the distinctions, ‘This is a being in hell’…?”
 The forty-ninth is,
“Does the Lord, having fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, apprehend the five forms of life in saṃsāra?”
 The fiftieth is,
“Lord, does a tathāgata apprehend bright, or dark, or bright and dark, or neither bright nor dark dharmas?”
 The fifty-first is,
“Lord, if all phenomena are empty of their own marks, well then, how do bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and free beings from the five forms of life in saṃsāra?”
 The fifty-second is,
“Lord, will beings pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing suffering or will they pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of suffering?”
 The fifty-third is,
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom practice in order to awaken to the truths?”
 The fifty-fourth is,
“Lord, what are ‘all dharmas as they really are’?”
 The fifty-fifth is,
“In that case, Lord, is awakening not a real thing?”
 The fifty-sixth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are in their nature not real things, if they have not been made by buddhas… why in these dharmas is there a distinction made between ‘these are beings in hell, these in the animal world’?”
 The fifty-seventh is,
“Lord, is there some real basis called suchness and unmistaken suchness that foolish, ordinary people stand on and settle down on as ‘a real basis’?”
 The fifty-eighth is,
“Lord, for someone who sees reality,  defilement does not happen… well then, what purification has the Lord been speaking about?”
 The fifty-ninth is,
“Lord, what is the sameness of all dharmas?”
 The sixtieth is,
“Lord, if all dharmas are like an illusion… how do bodhisattvas… produce the thought of unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
 The sixty-first is,
“Lord, is the dharma a tathāgata has fully awakened to, fully awakened to as an ordinary convention or as an ultimate?”
 The sixty-second is,
“Lord, given that dharmas are in their nature nonexistent, what is this ‘sameness of dharmas’?”
 The sixty-third is,
“Lord, is that sameness of dharmas not within the range even of a tathāgata?”
 The sixty-fourth is,
“Lord, is a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha not in control of the entire range of dharmas?”
 The sixty-fifth is,
“Lord, if, in the sameness of all dharmas, ‘this is an ordinary person…’ all cannot be apprehended, in that case would foolish ordinary people… not have specific features?”
 The sixty-sixth is, 
“Lord, if, in the sameness of dharmas, foolish ordinary people… do not have specific features, well then, Lord, from where do the Three Jewels—the Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel, and Saṅgha Jewel—appear in the world?”
 The sixty-seventh is,
“Lord, is the way in which a tathāgata does not move from the sameness of dharmas…?”
 The sixty-eighth is,
“Lord, if just that true dharmic nature of dharmas is just that true dharmic nature of ordinary people… given that those—namely, form…—have different marks… how do those dharmas with different marks come to have one mark?”
 The sixty-ninth is,
“Lord, is that true nature of dharmas a compounded phenomenon or is it an uncompounded phenomenon?”
 The seventieth is,
“Lord, if the sameness of all dharmas is empty of a basic nature, then no dharma does anything, so how, while dharmas are not doing anything and are not anything at all, do bodhisattvas not move from the ultimate but still work for the welfare of beings?”
 The seventy-first is,
“Lord, of what is emptiness empty?”
 The seventy-second is,
“Lord, if those ordinary dharmas are magical creations, are these extraordinary dharmas… magical creations as well?”
 The seventy-third is,
“Lord, are this ‘abandonment’… also magical creations as well?”
 The seventy-fourth is,
“Lord, what is the dharma that is not a magical creation?”
 The seventy-fifth is, 
“And what, Lord, is that?”
 The seventy-sixth is,
“Lord, according to what you have said…” 
 And the seventy-seventh is,
“Lord, if a person who is beginning the work is going to understand the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, how should they be advised and instructed?”
 You should know that all these questions have been asked for the sake of irreversible bodhisattvas seated in the retinue and for the benefit of persons in the future.
Explanation of Chapters 51 to 55
The deep places
 Among these, in regard to
“Subhūti, form is deep,”
here form is being used as a word for the suchness of form. Therefore, it asks 
“why is form deep?”
and says,
“Subhūti… just as the suchness of form is deep, so too is form deep,”
indicating that it is just suchness. This means that form is deep in the way that suchness is deep. 
 What is intended by the question,
“Lord, what is the suchness of form like?”
It is asking how, given that “suchness” is without attributes and hence is not the mark of form and is not contingent on form either, can you use the word form and so on in “the suchness of form, suchness of feeling”? 
“Subhūti, there is no form in the suchness of form, and there is no suchness of form other than form. The suchness of form is like that.”
Having eliminated falsely imagined phenomena, that thoroughly established suchness that is other than falsely imagined phenomena is separated from all mental images so it is not suitable to express it with the word “form” and so on. This is teaching that the name form and so on is superimposed onto suchness when it has stains, that it is not expressible as just that form and so on that foolish ordinary persons imagine, or other than that,  in order to designate it during that period. 
“Made to turn back from form, and nirvāṇa has been pointed out”—
with that “form is deep” they are made to turn back from falsely imagined form. “Nirvāṇa,” the true dharmic nature of form, “has been pointed out.”
 The illustration of the man with a strong libido is easy to understand.
“fill up as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River with the wholesome roots appropriated in a single day … it still would not approach what remains of those wholesome roots even by one hundredth part”
means that even if you were to fill up as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River with those wholesome roots accumulated in a single day, there would be many parts left over from the one part of the wholesome roots that filled up as many world systems as the sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. That part of the wholesome roots that filled up the world systems would not approach even a hundredth part of what remains of those wholesome roots.
“If… separated from the perfection of wisdom [that bodhisattva] were to… cultivate wisdom”
means if, without the wisdom of the knowledge of path aspects that sees what cannot be apprehended, they were to cultivate just ordinary wisdom. 
 Take
“this perfection of wisdom is the mother of the bodhisattvas”
as the knowledge of path aspects.
“Lord, the Lord has said, ‘Whatever merit has been accumulated, it is all imaginary,’ so how will a son of a good family or daughter of a good family make a lot of merit?”
Whatever the composition of the merit bodhisattvas separated from the perfection of wisdom accumulated it is falsely imagined, so the merit will not increase a lot. 
“What has been accumulated does not exist,”
is a nonexistent thing. Since it is a nonexistent thing, 
“they will not be able to enter into the right view  and the secure state of a bodhisattva,”
and so on. He is asking how if they are not able to do anything could that be correct.
“What [they]… have accumulated appears as just empty, appears as just in vain,”
and so on. This is saying, “I do not say that they increase merit by accumulating it,” and “I do not say that they increase merit by not accumulating it” either. How then? How should whatever the merit that bodhisattvas have to accumulate that has been obtained always in all respects be understood analytically as “just empty, in vain,” and as
“just ringing hollow?”
When they understand analytically like that, because they 
“are inseparable from the perfection of wisdom… to that extent they make infinite, incalculable merit.”
“What are the specific features…?”
He asks this as an aside because it is contextually appropriate.
“Subhūti, the incalculable is that which has no enumeration.”
That which cannot be enumerated by a word is incalculable; 
“the infinite”
cannot be measured; and
“the immeasurable”
cannot be delimited as just this, even by the force of a calculation. Its measure cannot be apprehended. All three, furthermore, are particulars of counting. 
“A calculable element or an incalculable element”
means
“the compounded element and the uncompounded element.”
“Form is also empty so it is infinite, incalculable, and immeasurable.”
A number, measure, and so on exist for falsely imagined phenomena, but in the emptiness element they do not exist. They are included in synonyms of emptiness. Therefore, there is the word “also,” in “form is also empty,” in order to make it into a particular. On account of great compassion, it is
“an exposition in harmony with what causes a tathāgata’s teaching.”
This means that it is conventionally an “exposition” in harmony with the cause, compassion.
“Lord, all phenomena are simply inexpressible?” 
Earlier it explained that just the true nature of dharmas is inexpressible. Now it teaches that all dharmas, not different from the true nature of dharmas, are simply inexpressible too. 
“Lord, does an inexpressible reality know increase or decrease?”
This teaches the following: it asks, if inexpressible is an expression for emptiness, and emptiness does not increase because of bright dharmas and does not decrease because of dark dharmas, and if the perfections and so on also have no increase or decrease, well then, on account of what cause will
“the knowledge of all aspects come with the good fortune of fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
Having asked that, the final part of the passage,
“they will make a dedication just like unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,”
teaches that it will happen because of the power of dedication with skillful means. 
“Lord, what is unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
It has as its essential nature the emptiness not different from form and so on. The inquiry is made so there will be a further explanation. 
“[They] should practice the perfection of wisdom like that, by way of no increase or decrease”
teaches that just this alone is the practice of the perfection of wisdom.
Which moment of thought causes awakening?
“Lord, do bodhisattva great beings fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because of the first production of the thought, or do they fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening because of a later production of the thought?”
This inquiry is in the part of the text to do with the deep places. Given that those who have accumulated wholesome roots will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, how will the wholesome roots for that come to be accumulated? Here, do bodhisattvas fully awaken  through the power of the initial production of the thought—produced prior to the first of three incalculable eons—or do they fully awaken through the power of the second, or the third, or the last of all the productions of the thought when they are seated at the site of awakening? In regard to those, they do not fully awaken because of a single thought, because it does not have such power and the rest of the accumulation of merit would be meaningless. It is also not because of all the thoughts either, because they are not suited to accumulation, since they are destined to perish instant by instant. That is what it teaches, so there the Lord gives 
“the illustration of an oil lamp”
saying that when the wick of an oil lamp is burned up, it has been burned up through the power of all the instants of flame, even though each is destined to perish instant by instant. Similarly, it teaches that full awakening too is through the power of all the thoughts, intending that even though they are momentary it is by way of accumulated habit formation.
“The Śuklavipaśyanā level 
is when there is special insight;
“the Gotra level”
is the highest ordinary dharma; 
“the Aṣṭamaka level”
is the path of the stream enterers; 
“the Darśana level”
is their result, the level of seeing; 
“the Tanū level”
is the once-returner level because it has attenuated attachment to sense objects and malice; 
“the Vītarāga level”
is the non-returner level because attachment and malice have been stopped; 
“the Kṛtāvin level”
is the state of a worthy one because the work has been done; 
“the Pratyekabuddha level”
is a pratyekabuddha’s awakening;
“the Bodhisattva level”
is the knowledge of path aspects; and
“the Buddha level”
is the knowledge of all aspects.
“Will that thought which has stopped be produced again?”
and so on, again teaches the deep state. 
“What has stopped will not be produced. What has been produced is subject to stopping. What is subject to stopping will not stop. It will remain just as suchness does. It will not be unmoved.”
That is a deep place. Take “that which has stopped will not be produced again” as stopped in its intrinsic nature—the uncompounded. Take “that which has been produced is not subject to stopping” as the compounded. It says “that which is subject to stopping will not stop” because there is not a second stopping. Take “it will remain just as suchness does” as suchness. As for “it will not be unmoved,” it says that because it has no intrinsic nature. 
“Subhūti, what do you think, is that thought also suchness?”
is asking, “Is compounded thought the intrinsic nature of suchness?”
“It is not, Lord,”
again says, “Because it is together with stains it is not the intrinsic nature of suchness.”
“Is that thought other than suchness?”
is asking, “Is compounded thought other than suchness?” Subhūti again says,
“It is not, Lord,”
because a falsely imagined phenomenon is not suitable to be described as just exactly a thoroughly established phenomenon or as different from it. 
“Is thought in suchness?”
and 
“is suchness in thought?”
are asking if they are a real basis and what is based on that relative to each other. 
“They are not, Lord,”
again says that the two—a falsely imagined phenomenon and a thoroughly established phenomenon—do not exist as a real basis and what is based on that.
“Does suchness see suchness?” 
This question intends: “Does that thought see all phenomena?” He again says,
“It does not, Lord,” 
because in the state of suchness an apprehended and apprehender do not exist. 
“Lord, someone practicing like that is not practicing anything at all”
teaches that they have not practiced anything at all.
“They practice in the ultimate where there are no habitual dualistic ideas.”
There is “they practice” and a second, “they do not.”
“Has the perception of a causal sign disintegrated because of them?”
This means do they make the perception of a causal sign nonexistent? He again says, 
“They do not, Lord,”
because an idea like “I will make the perception of a causal sign disintegrate” does not arise. This teaches that the habitual idea, such a conceptualization, is nonexistent. through the power of cultivating the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness meditative stabilizations they also cure themselves of their habit of perceiving a causal sign.
“[They] bring beings to maturity with those… meditative stabilizations,”
through the power of skillful means. That they will personally behold emptiness and so on, and bring beings to maturity as well, is the power of skillful means.
Karma in a dream and the waking state
“When [they]… have become absorbed in the three meditative stabilizations on emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness in a dream, do they improve on account of the perfection of wisdom?”
Having set the scene for the deep places, the two elders expound on just those meditative stabilizations that have gone before. Śāriputra asks intending this: If all phenomena cannot be apprehended, then, when bodhisattvas are absorbed in the three meditative stabilizations in a dream,  it makes sense that they should improve on account of the perfection of wisdom. But if the perfection of wisdom does not increase in a dream and does when they have stopped sleeping, in that case there is a certain distinction between phenomena that exist and that do not exist in a dream, and when they have not fallen asleep. 
“Venerable Śāriputra, if they improve on account of having meditated during the day, they improve in a dream like that as well?”
He is asking a question. Then the elder Subhūti teaches that here, when bodhisattvas are dreaming and also when they have stopped sleeping phenomena cannot be apprehended—they are similar in a dream and also when sleep has stopped. “A dream” and “the day” also are just merely constructed in thought. Both a dream and not being asleep are similar. Therefore, given that the two—the day and the dream—are similar, it explains that if the meditative stabilization when they have not fallen asleep increases wisdom, then the meditative stabilization in a dream increases wisdom as well. 
“Venerable Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings have made some karma in a dream is there an accumulation or diminution in their karma?”
What is the elder Śāriputra’s intention? He is asking: if phenomena are similar when not asleep and in a dream, well then, in regard to the giving that is the giving and so on in a dream, and also the result of stream enterer that is reached in a dream, with the earlier of the two is there or is there not the accumulation of good karma and with the later the finishing of the karma? 
 Then the elder Subhūti says, 
“The Lord has said that all phenomena are like a dream, so there is no accumulation or diminution there,” 
and so on. He is saying that when “accumulation  and diminution” are other than something real, all phenomena are thus dream-like, so both in a dream and when not asleep that karma and that agent are totally nonexistent. And in that case, why would you say there is an accumulation or a diminution from them? It says
“you cannot apprehend any phenomenon in a dream that is accumulated or diminished.”
It is teaching this: If somebody in a dream sees something filled up with river water, or sees a dried-up lake, is there an accumulation or a diminution from that? Or is it the case that just as there is both no accumulation or diminution there in a dream, similarly even during the day when they have not fallen asleep there is no accumulation or a diminution at all, either.
 Then the elder Śāriputra says, 
“If it is thought about in a certain way, on waking there is an accumulation or reduction in one’s karma.”
“I am not speaking based on bodhisattvas who view things as not findable, who are free from falsely imagining things, but rather based on present-day novices caught up in falsely imagining things. If, when they wake up and think intentionally about an act that they have done in their dream and rejoice in it, is there accumulation of or diminution in that karma done at night?” That is what Śāriputra is asking. He therefore intends a distinction between when they are in a dream and when they have has not fallen asleep. 
 Then the elder Subhūti says, 
“Venerable Śāriputra, what would you say about the karma of someone who committed a murder during the day, and someone who dreamed about committing the murder and on waking thought, ‘I killed him. It is excellent that I killed him’?”
This is saying that it is wrong, but what is intended? A certain man during the day or in a dream murders someone. When the murder has been committed, if he rejoices in those two actions intentionally with his thinking mind is there more maturation from rejoicing in the action of murder during the day  or is there more maturation from rejoicing in the action done in a dream?
 Then Śāriputra says,
“Venerable Subhūti, karma does not happen without an objective support; intention does not happen without an objective support.”
It intends to say that a murder in a dream is in its nature a nonexistent thing, so a thought apprehending that is apprehending something that is a nonexistent thing. It therefore has no additional maturation. 
 Then the elder Subhūti says 
“exactly so!”
rejoicing in Śāriputra’s words. So, what is this teaching? It is teaching that if karma does not happen without an objective support, well then, what Śāriputra said before, “If it is thought about in a certain way, on waking there is an accumulation or reduction from that karma,” is not correct. Here the rest of the argument is this: Were karma not to happen without an objective support, in that case, because what is done in a dream has no objective support but what is done when one has not fallen asleep does have an objective support, there would therefore be a distinction between the two—a dream and when one has not fallen asleep—so the statement “all dharmas are dream-like” gets damaged. So, to deal with that argument the elder Subhūti says,
“The intellect engages with the seen, the heard, the thought—something one has been aware of; the intellect does not engage with the unseen, the unheard, the unthought—a thing of which one has not been conscious. There, one intellectual act gets hold of defilement. Another intellectual act gets hold of purification.”
He is saying that novices caught up in apprehending things when dreaming and awake become intellectually engaged because of following after the seen, the heard, and the thought—the thing of which they have been aware—without investigating whether ultimately things exist or do not exist. When the intellect is engaged like that, some intellectual acts have no result,  some have a great result, some have a small result, some are caught up in and some are not caught up in defilement, and some are caught up in and some are not caught up in purification. What is this teaching? It is teaching that you should know that these intellectual acts come about through the force of perfect and deficient life forms, time periods, practices, bodies, sleep, and so on, and from the lack of necessary conditions. 
 What is Śāriputra thinking where he says,
“Venerable Subhūti, the Lord has said ‘all karma is isolated and all intention is isolated.’ ”
He is thinking that scripture says “all dharmas are isolated from an intrinsic nature,” so karmas and intentions are isolated from an intrinsic nature. How then is it possible to investigate whether they have an objective support or do not have an objective support?
 Then the elder Subhūti says, 
“Venerable Śāriputra, ordinary beings, having made a causal sign, pile up karmas.”
What he intends here is this: From the context, take this not with bodhisattva great beings who view things as not findable, who are free from thought construction, but rather with those caught up in apprehending things. Therefore, it teaches that having an objective support and not having an objective support is based on what is constructed by their intellects. 
 Then again, from,
“Venerable Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings in a dream give gifts,”
up to
“cultivate wisdom,”
the elder Śāriputra again voices other arguments. Set aside for the moment the novice bodhisattvas—if bodhisattvas whose continuums have matured give gifts in a dream, for them, since both dreaming and not having fallen asleep are similar, does the rejoicing in and dedication of the giving and so on become as excellent  as when not having fallen asleep? This is what he is saying.
“Venerable Śāriputra, you should ask this of Maitreya the bodhisattva, the great being,”
and so on. Maitreya has given the response to that argument because it is beneficial to the persons to be trained gathered there at that time, or to show that their intentions match his own. 
“Venerable monk Śāriputra, what do you think, will this—the designation ‘Maitreya the bodhisattva great being’—respond with the answer; or will form respond with the answer,” 
and so on. Maitreya has responded to the argument that the elder Śāriputra, with an apprehension of things, voiced before. For bodhisattvas who view without apprehending things and whose continuums have been matured, giving and so on, and rejoicing and dedication and so on, in both a dream and when not having fallen asleep, are nonexistent like unreal things in a dream, so Śāriputra has asked his question arguing like somebody who does not understand that they are unreal. It is a teaching from the perspective of emptiness.
 If persons and dharmas do not exist, what is Subhūti thinking when he says that Maitreya “will respond with the answer” to this? He is saying that he will speak based on words plucked out of thin air, or form and so on, or their emptiness will respond with the answer. It means here that when 
“all dharmas are not two and cannot be divided into two,”
are standing as one, who responds with what answer to whom? Which is to say, nobody responds with any answer. 
“Son of a good family, have you had direct witness of those dharmas in the way you have explained them to be?”
The elder Śāriputra has said: if you have had such direct witness of those dharmas, in that case you would apprehend separately a witness, something being witnessed, and a witnessing. 
 Therefore, the noble Maitreya  again says,
“I do not directly witness those dharmas in the way I have explained them to be.”
This is teaching that when he directly witnesses those dharmas, they cannot be apprehended and are also inexpressible, so how is he going to speak about them? 
 The Lord says,
“Do you see that dharma on account of which you come to be known as a worthy one?”
Having in mind that apart from the transformation of the basis, a dharma that is a “worthy one” does not exist, Śāriputra again says, 
“Lord, I do not.”
 What is the intention where Subhūti asks, 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings complete the perfection of wisdom?”
He is asking: “If all dharmas cannot be apprehended, who completes the perfection of wisdom in which way and for whose sake?”
Then the Lord, having taught that when assisting beings they become, governed by compassion, conventionally, those who have a perception with an objective support, delineates their methods to bring the six perfections to completion and teaches the purifications of a buddhafield. I will not go into these because the meaning of them all is clear.
It is not that all bodhisattvas make all these prayers that are vows. The prayers that are vows come about in harmony with each of their individual different aspirations. It could be that some have fully made a prayer that is a vow but later, because of the force of the beings’ karma, a bit of it might not be accomplished. 
The prophesy of Gaṅgadevī is also easy to understand.
Fully mastering emptiness
Then the elder Subhūti asks how a bodhisattva cultivates the three gateways to liberation and cultivates the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening while rejecting the freedom of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.  The explanatory section following that says they
“should understand analytically ‘…empty.’ ”
At the time special insight into emptiness is increasing, 
“one way or the other, when they understand this analytically, such an analytical understanding should be without mental distraction.”
At the time of the meditative stabilization on emptiness,
“without mental distraction they do not see the phenomenon that is the phenomenon to be actualized, and,”
as for the time when they reach suchness,
“not seeing that phenomenon they do not actualize it,”
and so on, up to
“they see [they]… are not joined and are not disjoined.”
That is what that the text teaches, that something apprehended and something that apprehends are equally the same and cannot be conceived of. 
 Hence, “not seeing that phenomenon they do not actualize it.” Just not seeing a phenomenon is the cause of not actualizing it. Were they to see it they would actualize it. And what would the fault be were they to have actualized it? They would have actualized the very limit of reality just like a śrāvaka does. And in that case they would connect with their liberation.
“How do bodhisattva great beings stand in emptiness but not actualize emptiness?”
This teaches that emptiness, “the phenomenon that is… to be actualized” that “they do not see,” is where they stand. Again, “not seeing that phenomenon they do not actualize it” teaches they do not actualize emptiness. This “stand… but not actualize” is asking “how could it be known?”
The Lord, based on the prior intention, teaches a modification:
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings contemplate emptiness  furnished with the best of all aspects, they do not contemplate that they should actualize it.”
With just the earlier intention, “I should meditate on emptiness,” those bodhisattvas do not have the intention “I will actualize emptiness,” like śrāvakas thinking “I will actualize the cessation.” The thought “I will meditate on emptiness” is just the intention “I will totally harmonize with it.” Therefore, this means that even later on it is only a meditation, it is not an actualization. Therefore, it says
“they contemplate that it is not the time it should be actualized, but rather it is the time it should be mastered.”
The mastering of emptiness without also actualizing it is the power of knowledge of mastery.
“When not in actual meditative equipoise… [they] attach their minds to an objective support”
is teaching that “knowledge of mastery” is mind in its ordinary state, it is not meditative equipoise. Therefore, in that instant there is no calm abiding, and because there is no calm abiding the extraordinary path does not arise. 
 Now, teaching that knowledge of mastery is the knowledge of when is and is not the time, it says
“it is the time for the perfection of giving,”
and so on. 
 Understand the heroic person illustration, bird illustration, and master archer illustration from the text.
“Lord, it is amazing! Sugata, it is amazing!”
is saying “it is amazing” that those seeing all dharmas as emptiness have not, in the interim,feeling intimidated, fallen to a śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha awakening that is caused by meditation on the three meditative stabilizations. 
 Here the Lord, with, 
“Subhūti, it is because the bodhisattva great beings do not forsake all beings,”
and so on, teaches the cause  of not feeling intimidated. Here there are a further seven subsections to the passage: the section about engaging with doctrines that are not good; the section about views with a false apprehension of facts; the section about distorted minds; the section about the conceptualization of a self and dharmas; the section about causal signs; the section about the fault of making wishes; and the section on questioning bodhisattvas.
 Among these, the first section is
“I will not forsake these ignorant beings, these beings who are deceived because they perceive doctrines that are not good as good.”
Bodhisattvas generate compassion and are attentive to not forsaking beings, and that causes them, in the interim, not to feel cowed and not to actualize the very limit of reality. 
 The second subsection is where they do not feel cowed based on the power of generating the thought, “These beings have… for a long time been practicing a practice with a false apprehension of facts while viewing… a self… a being and so on, so I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening and teach them the doctrines in order to eliminate their views.”
 The third subsection is where bodhisattvas think, “The minds of these beings have been distorted for a long time by the fourfold erroneous perception of permanence… happiness… pleasant… and self, so I will turn them back from that.”
 The fourth is where they think, “For a long time these beings have been practicing a practice while falsely imagining a being, and while falsely imagining the dharmas, form and so on, so, having fully awakened, I will explain the doctrine of emptiness for their sake.”
 The fifth is, “For a long time these beings have been practicing a practice with causal signs—the causal sign for a woman, for a man, and so on—so,  having fully awakened, I will explain the doctrine of signlessness for their sake.”
 Similarly, the sixth is, “For a long time these beings have been practicing a practice while making wishes, and making prayers so it will lead to the dharmas of wealth and the beautiful body of
“Śatakratu, Brahmā, a world protector,”
and so on, so, having fully awakened, I will explain the doctrine of wishlessness for their sake.”
 Also, in regard to asking bodhisattvas, if when asked they respond, “They must meditate well on 
emptiness… signlessness… wishlessness… not occasioning anything, nonproduction, and the absence of an existent thing,”
taking just those as their point of departure, they should know they will have been prophesied because they will have realized well the mark of the knowledge of mastery. But if, when asked, they respond, “They should reject the meditation on emptiness, and so on, they should not meditate on them, they should cast them away and cultivate impermanence and so on instead,” up to they should know they have not been prophesied. They
“are not like irreversible bodhisattvas who… have stepped onto the irreversible level.”
Those without mastery do not, like those who have reached the eighth level,
“having achieved mastery”
of them, 
“passing beyond the Tanū level,”
become irreversible. This means that they are not fully matured just through that. The “Tanū level” is from the second up to the seventh level. 
“Would there then, Lord, be ways in which [they] would be irreversible from awakening?”
It is teaching this: if they, even without having reached the eighth level where they are irreversible from awakening, having excellently achieved mastery, deliver the response  of an irreversible bodhisattva, would they become irreversible because of meeting the definition of those irreversible from awakening? 
“Levels that they have cleansed or levels that they are cleansing do not appear”
teaches the lower levels. 
“Those bodhisattva great beings… are few”
means that even though
“bodhisattvas who practice for awakening are many,”
those who will give the answer of an irreversible bodhisattva who has excellently developed mastery, even without having reached the eighth level, “are few.” 
“Whether they are levels that have been cleansed or whether they are levels that have not been cleansed”
teaches the lower levels.
 Then, the marks of irreversibility, the works of Māra, and spiritual friends occurring in this section of the text are again easy to understand.
Questions 18 to 27
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is like space, unimpeded.”
This means it is characterized as unimpeded like space. Earlier the explanation was of the perfection of wisdom impeded by the works of Māra and so on. Now,
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is without a mark. The perfection of wisdom’s mark does not exist at all”
says that it is marked as unimpeded. The perfection of wisdom is not the mark of anything else, and the mark of the perfection of wisdom is also not anything at all. This is teaching that it is not an entity that is a nonexistent thing.
“Subhūti… all phenomena are isolated from an intrinsic nature, all phenomena are empty of an intrinsic nature.”
The thoroughly established—the intrinsic nature of all phenomena—is isolated from and separated from all falsely imagined phenomena. Therefore, it means they “all are empty of the intrinsic nature.”
“Lord, if all phenomena are isolated  from all phenomena, and if all phenomena are empty of all phenomena, Lord, how could there be the defilement and purification of beings?”
and so on is asking: “Lord, if all phenomena are isolated from and empty of an intrinsic nature, later there will be nothing to be isolated from and nothing to be empty of, and if that is the case how will those—the isolated and empty—be defiled, and how will they be purified?”
 Having asked that, 
“What do you think, Subhūti, do beings go on grasping at ‘I’ and grasping at ‘mine’ for a long time?”
and so on, teaches the following: Even though all phenomena are already isolated from an intrinsic nature and empty of an intrinsic nature, simple folk do not know that they are just isolated and empty. On account of the fault of not knowing, they become attached to phenomena—the aggregates and so on—through grasping at them as “I” and grasping at them as “mine,” and because of that attachment they undertake actions that are good and bad and so on. Governed by that, beings link up with and pass through cycles of existence, becoming defiled by afflictive defilement and karmic defilement. Thus, there is defilement on account of the fault of not knowing. Later, when they have again found spiritual friends, based on having listened and reflected and so on they realize the mark of the isolated and the mark of the empty. Then the aforementioned defilement does not arise and gradually, through putting a stop to the imaginary dharmas, there is purification.
 Then to eliminate the doubts of those who think that because it has said they
“do not practice”
in all dharmas, 
“in form”
and so on, therefore nothing of benefit comes from the practice explained here,  it then says there is a lot of merit and explains its cause. You can understand the great increase in merit, and the cause for that as well, from the illustration of 
“a precious jewel”
in the text itself.
“Lord, given that all attention is separated from an intrinsic nature, that all attention is empty of an intrinsic nature”
is asking: if all attentions are isolated and separated from an intrinsic nature, how can they know they are 
“never separated from attention to the knowledge of all aspects,”
because when they are separated from and empty of an intrinsic nature, you cannot apprehend any
“knowledge of all aspects, or attention, or bodhisattva.”
 Then, with 
“Subhūti, if bodhisattva great beings know this,”
and so on, the Lord, not speaking while having falsely imagined a knowledge of all aspects, a bodhisattva, and attention as some other phenomena, without there being any ultimate difference between them, still simply designates bodhisattvas as “not separated from attention connected to the knowledge of all aspects,” just on account of their knowing all phenomena are isolated from an intrinsic nature.
“The perfection of wisdom is empty of an intrinsic nature”—
naturally pure and stainless wisdom is isolated from all dharmas, is empty of all dharmas. 
“It has no increase and it has no decline.”
This means there is neither increase, plucked out of thin air, on account of striving, nor is there decline on account of not striving. 
“Lord, given that the perfection of wisdom is separated from an intrinsic nature and empty of an intrinsic nature” 
is the second question. It is asking how,  if the perfection of wisdom is separated from an intrinsic nature, will an isolated, empty perfection of wisdom bring about full awakening to perfect, complete awakening.
 Then the Lord explains that bodhisattvas are the intrinsic nature of the dharma body so they are a separated state, an empty state. Furthermore, he is teaching that it is not as if dharma body bodhisattvas fully awaken to perfect, complete awakening on account of the power of the perfection of wisdom. They do not become more of what they are thanks to the perfection of wisdom, and they do not become less when they do not rely on the perfection of wisdom either, because they are marked by staying as what they are. He says,
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom is not one and it is not two either.”
He means “the knowledge of all aspects,” “bodhisattva,” “perfection of wisdom,” and “suchness” are not one, they cannot be divided, and they are not different in terms of a particular enumeration.
 The third question is,
“Lord, is it the emptiness of the perfection of wisdom, its state of ringing hollow, being in vain, being a fraud, and being pointless, that practices the perfection of wisdom?”
He is asking about five possibilities: “Is it the emptiness of the perfection of wisdom” that practices the perfection of wisdom; or does something other than the perfection of wisdom practice; or does the perfection of wisdom practice; or does emptiness practice; or does something other than emptiness practice? And, similarly, about two other possibilities: is it form and so on that practices or is it the emptiness of form and so on that practices? He has asked based on seven possibilities like that. Then,  because those same possibilities are in fact impossible, the Lord does not apprehend the practice, the perfection of wisdom, or a way of practicing; and then does not apprehended even nonappearances; and does not apprehend 
“production or stopping”
either. 
Taking that as his point of departure, the Lord gives an explanation of those bodhisattva great beings endowed with the forbearance for the nonproduction of dharmas who have been prophesied.
“Lord, is the bodhisattvas’ unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening prophesied because there will be a production of all the dharmas?”
Is it on account of the production of all the buddhadharmas? Is it because of
“the nonproduction of all the dharmas?”
Is it on account of the nonproduction of any of the dharmas—form and so on—or the defilement dharmas?
“What do you think, Subhūti, do you see that dharma, the dharma of which unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening is being prophesied?”
means something being prophesied and something causing full awakening are nonexistent things, so there is no such thing as a prophesy of this or that type of state. 
On account of such explanations of the deep places, it says
“Lord, this perfection of wisdom is deep,”
and so on.
Explanation of Chapters 56 to 63
 Then it goes on to give an explanation of great merit again in order to generate faith. All the glorification passages; the explanation of the good qualities; the exchange between Śatakratu and Ānanda; the description of Māra and the work of Māra; the description of what happens because of it; how one should behave in the presence of persons in the Bodhisattva Vehicle; the explanation of sameness; the conversation about ending, detachment, and cessation and so on; the explanation of the benefits of training;  surpassing nonperfect beings; the Śatakratu passage; immeasurable merit; and then again the Śatakratu passage are easy to understand from the scripture itself, so I have not explained them. 
No duality and no nonduality
“One way or the other they should turn it over… in such a way that there is no notion of duality and no notion of nonduality.”
This is saying that ultimately their thought-productions and those unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakenings, whatever they are, are not different so, because their suchness is categorized as purity, there is therefore “no notion of duality.” The dual is when there are stains and when there are no stains. The two exist as different particulars so there is also a notion of duality. Therefore it says “there is no notion of duality” because they are the same. There is the notion of duality because they are different. Alternatively, as explained clearly in the part of the text that comes below, the notion of duality is of “existent and nonexistent,” and the notion of nonduality is of “nonexistent and not nonexistent.” 
 Then also after that it says,
“And one way or the other they should turn it over in such a way that awakening will not be in that thought, nor in another thought either.”
Based on the fact that there has been a transformation of the basis, it “will not be in that thought.” Ultimately they are not different so it will not be “in another thought either.”
“Subhūti, what do you think, do you see that thought that is like an illusion?”
What does this intend? If a thought is like an illusion but awakening is not like an illusion, then there would be a fault. A thought and awakening are both like an illusion, however, therefore the fault is not there. 
“The dharma that is extremely isolated will not be existent or nonexistent.”
A falsely imagined phenomenon is like an illusion, so,  as with an illusion, it is not suitable to say “it is existent” or “it is nonexistent,” and it is also not suitable to say “it is not existent and it is not nonexistent” either. A thoroughly established phenomenon is isolated from all aspects of a thing, so it is also not suitable to say “it is existent.” It is not suitable to say “it is nonexistent,” because its inexpressible isolated nature exists. The convention “it is existent” also exists, so it is not suitable to say “it is nonexistent.” And the convention “it is nonexistent” also exists, so it is not suitable to say “it is not nonexistent.” Therefore, the notion of duality and the notion of nonduality are not tenable. 
“Lord, it is because all those dharmas that are defiled or purified do not exist and are not apprehended.”
Phenomena that become defiled and become purified do not exist because the defiled does not exist even when there are stains, because it is isolated from an intrinsic nature, like space. And because that is just nonexistent, something not there before that has been purified is nonexistent too. This is the explanation of “it will not be in that thought, nor in another thought either.”
“And a dharma that is extremely isolated is not something you cultivate and not something you analyze.”
To “cultivate” is to become habituated; that is untenable because it is isolated. To “analyze” is to eliminate stains; that too is untenable because it is isolated. 
“There is not any dharma that is bringing anything about.”
Because it is extremely isolated it is not something that causes the attainment of awakening. 
“Given that it is extremely isolated, how will there be a realization of the isolated by the isolated?”
Given that the perfection of wisdom and perfect, complete awakening are extremely isolated how will an isolated perfection of wisdom  come to realize an isolated perfect complete awakening?
 With
“exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!”
the Lord teaches that were one to be isolated but the other not isolated, in that case it would not be tenable. But both are isolated like that, so there is therefore no fault. When the true reality that all dharmas are marked as isolated is understood, then there is complete, full awakening. 
“The way I understand the meaning of what you, Lord, have said, is that bodhisattva great beings are not those who do what is difficult” 
means that when one thing is apprehended and another thing is not apprehended, it is difficult because they do not conform, but since all dharmas do not exist—that is, are nonexistent things—they are not apprehended. It is not difficult to understand that you cannot apprehend something that does not exist. 
“Lord this course of action where nothing is apprehended is the course of action of bodhisattvas.”
There is no course of action except a course of action where nothing is apprehended. 
Then it teaches that the perfection of wisdom is a state without thought construction. That is easy to understand.
Cyclic existence and nirvāṇa
“How has this division of cyclic existence into the five forms of life… come about, and how do the categorizations of stream enterer,”
and so on, come about? This is asking how, if all phenomena are without thought construction, the cycles of existence and purification dharmas come about. 
 Then the Lord states that these thought constructions are in error; they are marked by grasping at the nonexistent and by obscuring the existent. Because they are mixed up with them, thought constructions that are greedy, hating, and so on obscure the existent. They grasp at the nonexistent. Because they give rise to them,  intentions to perform karmic action that is meritorious, demeritorious, and so on also grasp at error. Because those actions and those thought constructions give rise to the maturation consciousnesses, they do not grasp true reality either. Therefore 
“the desire-to-do”
and greed and so on have what is not true reality as their object, so all origination is not a true intrinsic nature. The “five forms of life”
“in the hells, animal world, and world of Yama, and as a human and god”
are explained as the intrinsic nature of true reality. Therefore, even though all phenomena are not thought construction, cyclic existence is still presented like that. 
 Also, for purification dharmas it presents all the stream enterers and so on as simply not constructed in thought, teaching that in their intrinsic there is no difference in nature between stream enterers and so on, up to tathāgatas, because all phenomena do not pass beyond the dharma body.
 Having thus heard about the true dharmic nature of the perfection of wisdom, Śāriputra’s understanding greatly increases and he says,
“Ah! Those bodhisattva great beings who are practicing this perfection of wisdom make a practice of something really worthwhile.”
Subhūti then says that they
“make a practice of something that is not worthwhile!”
It is not worthwhile because it is not a real thing and is not something that exists. With that in mind, using ordinary reasoning it says they
“do not apprehend even something not worthwhile, so however could they apprehend something really worthwhile?”
It makes the conventional statement that even ordinarily it is easy to get something worthless, but it is hard to get something worth a lot. 
“It is right to bow down to those bodhisattva great beings… who do not actualize these dharmas as being the same”—
to stream enterers and so on and tathāgatas as being the same, and to the dharma body and the very limit of reality as being the same. 
“Because space is isolated”—
because space is isolated from its mental image.  This passage, furthermore, is in three subsections: the passage on space and beings being alike; the passage on the armor of space-like beings; and the passage on form and so on, and beings, being alike.
 The explanation of isolation and the benefits of the perfection of wisdom are easy to understand.
Standing in the knowledge of all aspects
 Subhūti asks,
“Lord, given that no phenomenon is apprehended when they have stood in suchness and practiced for suchness, how will they stand in the knowledge of all aspects?”
Standing in reality and progress would be viable were any phenomenon to exist, but if all phenomena are not apprehended, how will they stand? 
“Subhūti, they stand as things really are, like a tathāgata’s magical creation.”
This means that just as a tathāgata’s magical creation does all that has to be done and stands, so too bodhisattvas stand as well. 
“Lord, given that no phenomenon called ‘a tathāgata’s magical creation’ is apprehended at all,”
and so on, is teaching that there is no phenomenon at all called “a tathāgata’s magical creation,” and because it is just nonexistent there is no standing and practicing in suchness, no full awakening, and no demonstration of the Dharma, so how can it be tenable that “a bodhisattva exists”? 
“Given that even suchness is not apprehended, what need is there to say more about someone who will stand in suchness.”
This teaches other things that are not tenable. It is saying this because during the period it has stains even suchness is comparable to a falsely imagined phenomenon. At that time even suchness cannot be apprehended as what suchness really is. 
 The Lord’s intention when it says
“exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!”
is this: He is saying there would be a fault if something were to be apprehended and something else  were not to be apprehended. But given that a bodhisattva, the perfection of wisdom, awakening, standing, and progressing all do not exist what fault is there in this?
“And why? Subhūti, it is because whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise,”
unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening remains, so it is there at all times. Therefore, “standing” and “progress” do not exist at all. This is teaching that standing, progress, and full awakening do not exist at all in suchness. 
 Then there is the praise of Subhūti, the praise of dwelling in the perfection of wisdom, the worship of the gods, the account of the six thousand monks, the benefits of the perfection of wisdom, the entrusting it to Ānanda, the enactment of a magical performance, the training in the perfections, the glorification of the perfection of wisdom, and the account of it being inexhaustible.
“Ānanda, this deep perfection of wisdom is the entrance into all letters, and the entrance into all for which there are no letters. Ānanda, this deep perfection of wisdom is the gateway to all the dhāraṇīs—the dhāraṇī gateways in which bodhisattva great beings should train.”
It is the entrance into those recollections, wisdoms, and meditative stabilizations related with speech sounds; it is the entrance into those recollections, wisdoms, and meditative stabilizations related with that for which there are no speech sounds; and it is the gateway to those doctrine dhāraṇīs, meaning dhāraṇīs, forbearance dhāraṇīs, and secret mantra dhāraṇīs.
“Subhūti, because form is inexhaustible they will accomplish the perfection of wisdom,”
and so on,  means they should generate wisdom having taken the inexhaustibility of dharmas—form and so on—as their objective support.
“Through form and space being inexhaustible, Subhūti”—
even while taking the suchness of form and so on, and space, as an objective support, they should generate the wisdom that they are inexhaustible.
 Then the benefits of the space-like inexhaustible meditation connecting it with each of the six perfections is easy to understand.
“[They] do not apprehend inner emptiness as ‘inner emptiness’ ”
means they do not construct it in thought as “inner emptiness.”
“[They] do not apprehend ‘form is empty’ or ‘is not empty,’ ”
because they do not construct it in thought as being either.
 Each of the six perfections being connected one with the other, then skillful means and the account of the completion of the accumulations, the wheel-turning emperor illustration,  the woman illustration, the heroic person who heads into battle illustration, the local ruler illustration, the river illustration, the right hand illustration, the taste in the ocean illustration, the precious wheel illustration, and then the explanation of the six perfections are easy to understand.
“Lord, if the perfections are not different why is the perfection of wisdom said to be the highest… when it comes to the five perfections?”
The idea is that they have no specific feature because they are not different, and a highest is not tenable when they are the same. 
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!”
The idea is that the five perfections are not different when they are informed by it—namely, the perfection of wisdom—so, because based on it they are just not different, it is highest among them. The 
“Sumeru”
illustration teaches this too. 
“Lord, given that there is no specific feature or variation in any phenomenon for someone who has entered into reality”
is saying that a phenomenon  does not appear with a specific feature to a person who has entered into reality. Similarly, because of the force of reality, phenomena have no specific features. You should not, therefore, say just the perfection of wisdom is 
“the most excellent.”
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!”
teaches that based on the perfection of wisdom they become those who have entered into reality, so it is 
“best.”
Thus, even though they are not different, following the conventional terms in use in the world, one says “this is on account of giving,” “this is moral,” “this is patience,” and the cause of saying that, furthermore, is the perfection of wisdom, not anything else. The
“precious lady”
illustration teaches this too. 
“The perfection of wisdom does not take hold of or release any dharma.”
If a bodhisattva’s wisdom takes hold of any dharma just that is the fault of settling down on it, and even if it releases any, the knowledge of a knower of all aspects is not achieved, hence it “does not take hold of or release.” Alternatively, based on a falsely imagined phenomenon it does not take hold, and based on a true dharmic nature it does not release. 
“Subhūti, those who do not pay attention to form… do not take hold of form.”
There is no “do not take hold” at all. The unreal is something that does not exist, so it says just those who do not pay attention “do not take hold.” 
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings do not pay attention to form, up to do not pay attention to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, then those bodhisattva great beings’ wholesome roots flourish.”
Phenomena that do not exist are nonexistent, so it teaches that having comprehended that they are nonexistent things and just not paying attention to them is the flourishing of wholesome roots. 
“Those bodhisattva great beings fall back from the perfection of wisdom.”
On account of the fault of focusing on the causal sign they have attachment.
“All phenomena… have not been taken hold of.”
They have not been taken hold of because they are not attached to the perfection of wisdom. The wisdom of the bodhisattvas is not attached to anything and does not take hold of anything. Thus,
“the perfection of wisdom is not separated from the perfection of wisdom”
means that at all times the perfection of wisdom is not separated from the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom. 
 If all dharmas, whatever they are, are thus not separated from their intrinsic nature, 
“how, then, is the perfection of wisdom to be accomplished?”
This is asking: if all dharmas are not separated from their intrinsic nature, how then, through the wholesome roots and so on, are they to be appropriated?
“[They] do not settle down on form, nor do they settle down on ‘this is form, this is its form,’ ” 
and so on, is teaching that nothing accomplishes anything, because they do not settle down on anything. By properly not seeing, just the realization of things as they really are, marked by remaining just as they are, is said to be accomplishing, not something else. This should also be understood from the
“wheel-turning emperor”
analogy and the
“driver” 
analogy.
“Lord, if the perfection of wisdom does not produce and does not stop any phenomenon,”
and so on, is asking: If the bodhisattvas’ wisdom does not produce any dharma and does not stop anything bad, what do the six perfections do? How will the six perfections be completed? With
“Subhūti, having turned the knowledge of all aspects  into an objective support,”
and so on, the Lord is saying: they do not complete the equipment, having thought ‘I have to produce something. I have to stop something.’ It is teaching that they dedicate them over to the knowledge of all aspects and complete them.
“Form is not conjoined and not disjoined.”
When they practice the six perfections they should not have it in mind that they have to separate from, and have to produce a disjunction from, the fetters to form. It means because something with such an essence is in its intrinsic nature pure it “is not conjoined and not disjoined.”
“[They] should not work with the idea ‘I will stand in form,’ ”
and so on. They should not work with the idea, “In my future lives I will be someone with a great body and mind,” or “I will stand, in result mode, in the knowledge of all aspects.”
 “Form is not situated anywhere.”
Take this as the true dharmic nature of form. There is the fruit tree analogy, and 
“the door of all,”
and
“the master archer”
analogies. Then,
“the buddhas… watch over… but they do not apprehend giving, do not apprehend morality, patience… at all.”
Just as they watch by way of not apprehending, by not apprehending giving and so on, so too they watch over bodhisattvas as well, by way of not apprehending them. 
“When they know the suchness… they will come to know all dharmas in brief and in detail.”
When they know the thoroughly established phenomenon as just “suchness,” they come to know in brief; and when they know the suchness of form, the suchness of feeling, and so on as uncleaned thoroughly unestablished phenomena, they come to know in detail. 
“Subhūti, the very limit of reality is the limitless.”
The word “limit” means summit, as in, for instance, “the summit of a mountain.” In some cases it is taken as an end, as in, for instance, “the edge of an ocean.” It is without both of those limits. Limitless in the sense of summit is saying it is not truncated; endless is saying it is “not delimited.” Therefore, it means “the very limit of reality” is “unchangeable reality.”
“Subhūti, all dharmas should be known as not conjoined and not disjoined.”
They are nonexistent things, so they are neither. 
“Skilled in singular words”
shows they know number;
“skilled in feminine words”
shows they know gender;
“skilled in the path that has been cut”
shows they are skilled in the ordinary path;
“skilled in the path that has not been cut”
shows they are skilled in the extraordinary path.
“Subhūti… they should practice the perfection of wisdom through the calmness of form.”
Having taken hold of the defining marks of calmness and so on they should generate wisdom. 
“They should accomplish the perfection of wisdom by accomplishing a space-like emptiness.”
They should comprehend it as a space-like emptiness. 
“They should meditate on the perfection of wisdom by meditating on a space-like emptiness.”
They should meditate on emptiness by just meditating on space.
 Wanting to give a specific explanation for each of these, it teaches that the first is practice during the period when there is effort and there are causal signs; the accomplishing is from the first level on up during the period when there is effort but there are no causal signs; and the meditation is from the eighth level when it is spontaneous and there are no causal signs. 
“With an unbroken, unseparated stream of connected thoughts one after the other” 
means they should make that unbroken and unseparated stream of thoughts, which is to say ones that are connected one after the other in a continuum, uninterrupted, undivided into separate ones, and connected together. They
“should meditate… in such a way that mind and mental factor dharmas are not set in motion at all”
means until the transformation of the basis. 
 Subhūti asks: will those
“who have meditated reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
and the Lord negates that with
“no.”
Take this with the period when there is effort and thought construction. Subhūti asks,
“Will they without having meditated?”
and the Lord is silent, and then negates that with
“no.”
Subhūti asks,
“Will they, having meditated when they meditated, and without having meditated when they did not meditate?”
Because the two faults have already been explained, the answer is no. The response to,
“Will they without having meditated and without having not meditated?”
eliminates that because the passages propounding the two main options could have raised a doubt, so it teaches that it is a totally inexpressible and inconceivable state. 
“Just as suchness will, Subhūti”—
teaching all dharmas later in a state that cannot be apprehended—
“just as the self element,”
and so on, will.
“Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom cannot be labeled”
means it is inexpressible.
“Subhūti, what do you think, can a being that is a label be apprehended?”
and so on is teaching that hell and so on do not exist because they are falsely imagined phenomena, but they are labeled conventionally for the benefit of ordinary fools. 
“Without taking anything away and without adding anything”—
over-negation of what exists is “taking away”; over-reification of what does not exist is “adding something.” 
“Subhūti, they should train in those as  not produced and not stopping.”
Training “as not produced” is without over-reification; training “as not stopping” is without over-negation. 
“Without meditating on and without investigating”
is training in not occasioning anything. It is training that is not produced, because of not occasioning anything by thinking, “I should meditate, I should produce something”; and it is training that does not stop because of not occasioning anything by thinking, “I should destroy,” should make something nonexistent.
“Form as empty of form”—
falsely imagined form does not exist in form itself because it is empty of the defining mark of form. 
“Not practicing is the bodhisattvas’ practice of the perfection of wisdom”—
not practicing anything is the practice, because nothing can be apprehended.
“If not practicing is the practice of the perfection of wisdom, how then will bodhisattva great beings who are beginning the work practice the perfection of wisdom?”
This is the question, and 
“bodhisattva great beings beginning the work,”
and so on,
“starting from the first production of the thought… train in all phenomena as providing no basis for apprehension” 
teaches that those beginning the work do not have a practice of the ultimate, but still they should train for it, so just that training is the practice.
“Lord… does the findable provide a basis for not apprehending?”
This is asking, “Is a basis for not apprehending findable?” An unfindable intrinsic nature is unfindable so it cannot be said that “it provides a basis for apprehending,” therefore it says that it does not, with
“neither does the findable provide a basis for not apprehending.”
This means there is a sameness to all dharmas that are marked as being unfindable, so the absence of a basis for apprehending is not unfindable.
“The sameness  of the findable and the unfindable is the unfindable.”
The existent thing when all dharmas are findable and the nonexistent thing when all dharmas are unfindable are both comparable. Why? Because they are without an intrinsic nature. The findable is falsely imagined and hence without an intrinsic nature, and the unfindable is in the form of a nonexistent thing and hence without an intrinsic nature too, so both are comparable as being without an intrinsic nature. This means the sameness of both the findable and unfindable, that absence of an intrinsic nature, is the unfindable.
“How… will… [they] complete level after level, and how… will they reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
This intends to say that if they are not attached to what provides a basis for apprehending, how will they work hard at level after level and the knowledge of all aspects? 
“Subhūti… a perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended,”
and so on, teaches that with a findable intrinsic nature a higher level or the knowledge of all aspects would not be reached, but because the perfection of wisdom, awakening, and a bodhisattva are in their nature unfindable, as the absence of apprehending gets stronger and stronger there is an ascent from one level to the other and they reach the knowledge of all aspects. 
“How will [they]… make an investigation into… all these dharmas that are without an intrinsic nature?”
If all dharmas are without an intrinsic nature, how will they make an investigation into
“ ‘this is form, this is feeling,’ ”
and so on?
“Subhūti… bodhisattvas… who do it in such a way that they apprehend form… do not make an investigation into dharmas,” 
and so on, teaches that bodhisattvas do not apprehend any dharmas, form and so on. As they progress more and more, they apprehend less and less and thereby enter into an unfindable reality. 
“Lord, if [they]… do not apprehend form,”
and so on, is asking: how, if they have entered into an unfindable reality, will they accomplish practices that apprehend a basis—the completion of the perfections, entry into the secure state of a bodhisattva, purification of a buddhafield, bringing beings to maturity, awakening, turning the wheel of the Dharma, the work of a buddha, and freeing all beings?
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of form,”
and so on, teaches that bodhisattvas do not practice the dharmas, form and so on, but rather practice for the state in which all dharmas are unfindable. The earlier explanation was teaching that they were findable conventionally as designations, not ultimately. 
 I have explained the meaning of 
“unmade, unchanging”
before.
“How is there an arrangement of three vehicles?”
means that if all dharmas are unmade and unchanging there will be no division into three vehicles.
“Subhūti, no arrangement at all can be apprehended in dharmas that are unmade and unchanging” 
intends that the falsely imagined arrangement of vehicles does not ultimately exist. Here the questions and answers are easy to understand so they have not been explained in detail.
“As an ordinary convention, but not ultimately, I keep these beings… away  from seizing on the unreal.”
It is saying that ultimately any beings included in the three groups are unfindable. They are simply designated conventionally with those names, simply as an ordinary convention, not ultimately, to stop them seizing on unreal dharmas as real. 
“But Lord, the tathāgatas stood in the ultimate and fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
He responds in the negative to this question with 
“no, Subhūti,”
because ultimately there is no standing and there is no full awakening. 
“Well then, the tathāgatas stood in a succession of miraculous powers and fully awakened”
means if not ultimately, well then, as magical creations? Again, the answer he gives is because they absolutely do not exist. A realization inexpressible in its nature and in the form of self-reflexive analytic knowledge of all dharmas is complete awakening. He intends this: “And so why do you still inquire if they stand in the ultimate, or if they stand in a succession of miraculous powers?” With
“but do not stand in the compounded element or the uncompounded element,”
and so on, it teaches that even
“awakening”
is not anywhere at all. It explains that with the analogy of a tathāgata’s magical creation.
 As for,
“Subhūti, there is no distinction… between a tathāgata and a tathāgata’s magical creation,”
and 
“the magical creation does the work,”
the Lord Buddha was passing into complete nirvāṇa and at that time he did not see a bodhisattva like our lord Maitreya suitable for a prophecy, to whom he could say, “After I have passed away, do the work of a buddha and work for the welfare of beings.” He therefore emanated a magically created  perfect form comparable to his own body and said to it, “You must do the work of a buddha.” He then passed into nirvāṇa. When he had done so the Tathāgata’s magical creation did the work of the Buddha in all world systems and benefited beings. When that magical creation saw a bodhisattva suitable for a prophesy, he entrusted beings into that bodhisattva’s hands and demonstrated complete nirvāṇa. Between that magical creation and a tathāgata there is no difference at all. 
 It says
“the true nature of dharmas on account of which the magical creation…”
because they are both the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Both come about just in order to benefit beings, and both do their work. 
“But has the Lord not complicated the true dharmic nature of all dharmas”
by explaining nonexistent dharmas as being existent?
“Subhūti, I have taught… dharmas with words and signs.”
He accepts the ideas of simple folk as ordinary convention. He has explained like that; otherwise, it would not be easy.
“There is no settling down to do with names and signs.”
He uses conventional designations that are in accord with ordinary people because they are incapable of understanding in other ways. It is difficult for them. There is no settling down on them, however, so there is no fault. This is teaching that were they to settle down, thinking “this is true,” then there would be a fault.
“Subhūti, were a name to settle down on a name, or were a sign to settle down on a sign”—
if names settled down on names or if causal signs settled down on causal signs, then 
“emptiness would settle down on emptiness,”
and similarly,
“signlessness”
and so on would settle down. Thus, it is saying that emptiness and so on  do not settle down because they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature. Similarly, buddhas and śrāvakas do not settle down.
“Subhūti, all dharmas are thus simply mere names.”
Thus, while all dharmas are simply mere names and signs, those in the world do not know them as such. Therefore, bodhisattvas practice so that they will come to that realization. Thus, all dharmas are simply mere names and signs and they reach the knowledge of all aspects by realizing them. This is teaching that were any dharma to be an existent thing then there would be no complete awakening.
The three knowledges
“Subhūti, all-knowledge belongs to śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, the knowledge of path aspects… to bodhisattva great beings, and the knowledge of all aspects… to tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas.”
Among these, “all-knowledge”: Beginning as the three forms of the knowledge of all those who know that “all compounded phenomena are impermanent; all contaminated phenomena are suffering; all phenomena are without a self,” all-knowledge is the definitive knowledge of all dharmas based on dharma and subsequent realization knowledge. That knowledge, furthermore, is not knowledge of all dharmas in all aspects. The knowledge of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas is called all-knowledge because by way of the three marks and four truths they are not perplexed about all dharmas. 
 “The knowledge of path aspects”: Here, from the first production of the thought of awakening on the devoted course of conduct level up to the Dharmameghā level,  the knowledge operating as insight by penetrating into suchness in the omnipresent sense, the tip sense, and so on, which acts to cause the transformation of the basis, operates for the happiness and benefit of beings, and causes bodhisattvas to reach the great city of the knowledge of all aspects is called the knowledge of path aspects.
 “The knowledge of all aspects” is the knowledge of buddhas as far-reaching as the space element, for the welfare of beings without interruption, that realizes the body of dharmas—a resultant knowledge of the abandonment of residual impression connections called the knowledge of all aspects because it is the result of having comprehended all dharmas in all aspects. 
“Subhūti, that one aspect on account of which… [it] is called ‘knowledge of all aspects’ is thus the calm aspect.”
That aspect the tathāgatas comprehend, the subsiding of all the aspects of the conceptualizations separated entirely from the world as beings and from the container world, when the morality encompassing the three realms has stopped the net of conceptual thought—that which is the extremely calm aspect that constitutes the spontaneous body of dharmas that is the absolutely pure dharma-constituent accessed as a sameness—is the aspect of all dharmas, hence “all aspects.” The knowledge entity of the sort that has accessed such an aspect is called the knowledge of all aspects.
“An abandonment of all residual impression connections”—
from among the residual impressions left by action and conceptual affliction, here cutting the continuum of the uninterrupted arising, one to the next, of cause and effect is called the abandonment of all residual impression connections.
“Before reaching the knowledge of all aspects  is there an uncompounded abandonment of afflictions?”
[The Lord] says [there is] because it is in the form of a cessation. He says, nevertheless, the cessation is simply just an abandonment, so 
“they still do odd things with their bodies and voices. These are not even bad in ordinary persons,”
like gazing in a mirror, hopping while walking, and Pilindavatsa’s use of a word for a low caste woman. These are not bad, whether for an ordinary person or a noble person. 
“Do bodhisattvas actualize the very limit of reality having stood on a path… or having stood on what is not a bad path?”
and so on. The Lord again says about the possibilities that “they cannot stand on the path because it is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature.”
“Lord, if the path is not an existent thing and nirvāṇa is not an existent thing, why is it taught that ‘this is a stream enterer; this is a once-returner,’ ”
and so on, intends that you can suppose about the explanations of noble persons and of buddhas that they are explanations based on the path, or explanations because of having reached nirvāṇa, but if there are neither, how is there going to be a presentation of noble persons? 
“Subhūti… all of these are categories of the uncompounded.”
He again says that even though both a path and nirvāṇa are nonexistent they are categories of the suchness that is the basic nature of the uncompounded.
“Lord, does something uncompounded make the categories ‘this is a stream enterer’,”
and so on, is asking—intending the “categories of the uncompounded”—whether the uncompounded makes, or produces, those categories of persons. 
“Subhūti, the uncompounded does not make categories,”
and so on, teaches that even though the uncompounded is not the producer, still,  because of the special feature of entering into suchness through the power of the transformation of the basis, and the special feature of the abandonment of latent affliction, this or that sort of person comes about. 
“Lord, how will there be a later limit of saṃsāra?”
Earlier, in the explanation of the emptiness of no beginning and no end, it said “there is no saṃsāra,” about the unfindable beginning, middle, and end of saṃsāra. Now it asks this, intending that if the worthy ones are categories of the uncompounded there will be an end to saṃsāra.
“Having taken ordinary convention as the authority, they are simply spoken about, even though ultimately there cannot be categories.”
This is teaching that the suchness of ordinary persons and worthy ones is there at all times so there is no later limit, but still, having taken the cutting of the continuum of those falsely imagined dharmas called “the five aggregates” as its point of departure, it explains like that according to ordinary convention. Therefore, it says
“those for whom an end is demarcated.”
“Lord, if in all dharmas empty of their own marks a prior limit is not apprehended, what need is there to say more about a later limit?”
This is saying the falsely imagined phenomena, the five aggregate “dharmas, are empty of their own marks” because they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature and hence are like an illusion. So, given that there is no “prior limit” of them perceived as being produced, “what need is there to say more about a later limit” when they are perceived as stopping?
“Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!”
He rejoices in his statement because all dharmas are not produced and do not stop.
The meaning of pāramitā
“Subhūti… this perfection of wisdom is, of all dharmas, perfect; therefore, it is called perfection of wisdom.”
There are four alternative meanings of pāramitā.
 Among them, first, similar in meaning to the word parama (ultimate), there is the word parami. An abstract noun “superiority” (pārami) is derived from that. It says “superiority” because it is in the form of the limit of all dharmas and all dharmas culminate in it. The received tradition says, “Also when a suffix that makes an abstract noun [like -tā] is at the end it expresses just the thing itself, as, for example, saying of running water, ‘the water element’s fluidity.’ ”  Hence it says, “Subhūti, this is the ultimate (parama) superiority (pārami-tā) of all dharmas.” It means that it is extremely superior, it is the final superiority of all dharmas.
 Alternatively, pāram (farther shore) means limit and ita means gone. Hence pāramitā, “gone to the other side.” Therefore, it says
“with this… all śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattva great beings, and tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas have reached the other side.”
It is called perfection because it causes them to go to the farther shore. 
 Alternatively, construe the word parama (perfect) with paramārtha (the ultimate). Because it arises from the ultimate it is an understanding of the ultimate (pāramitā); it comes about with the ultimate as its objective support. The wisdom that has arisen having taken as its objective support the basic nature marked by nonabiding nirvāṇa, which is the ultimate sameness of all dharmas, is the perfection of wisdom. Therefore, it says,
“Also, Subhūti, with this perfection of wisdom the tathāgata has fully awakened to the fact that all dharmas are not ultimately different; therefore, it is called perfection of wisdom.”
The wisdom has the ultimate as its objective support so the tathāgatas have fully awakened to the ultimate. 
 Alternatively, construe the word pāra (farthest limit) with suchness, because it is the farthest limit of everything. The wisdom that has gone into the farthest limit, has reached suchness, is said to be perfection (pāramitā). Therefore, it says, 
“gone into this perfection of wisdom is suchness, and gone into it  also is unmistaken suchness.”
Because gone into it are suchness and so on, it is said that it has extended over suchness and so on. 
“Neither conjoined with nor disjoined from,”
and so on—up to here, the explanation has been of just the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom. 
“This perfection of wisdom causes the practice of all dharmas, this perfection of wisdom bestows all confidences”
means the practice of all dharmas causing the production of all knowledges.
“Because all those who do the stopping, those who will stop, and the way the stopping happens cannot be apprehended in the perfection of wisdom.”
This means a stopper, something that needs to be stopped, and the stopping to be done cannot be apprehended in this perfection of wisdom, so they cannot stop bodhisattvas practicing it. 
“Furthermore, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings should practice the reality of the perfection of wisdom—namely, they should practice the reality of impermanence, the reality of suffering, and the reality of selfless.”
Having taught the condition shared in common by everything with these three, the realities of these eleven knowledges, from
“the good of the knowledge of suffering, the good of the knowledge of origination,”
up to
“the good of the knowledge of mastery, and the good of the knowledge in accord with sound,”
are the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom, so they teach the good of the perfection of wisdom. 
“According to the reality and the mode”—
“the reality” is those realities of impermanence and so on; “the mode” is the intrinsic nature of the perfection of wisdom dealt with below.
“When… practicing this deep perfection of wisdom’s reality… they should not practice with the idea ‘greed is good for me’ or ‘is bad for me,’ ”
and so on,  is teaching that they should eliminate the conceptualization of good or bad as different, because in suchness the concern with such things does not exist. 
“They should not practice with the idea ‘form is good for me’ or ‘form is bad for me.’ ”
Viewing form falsely considered as a fact is “bad”; viewing form as unfindable is “good.” 
“Whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise”
is teaching that 
“the perfection of wisdom does not do anything good or bad to anything,”
because
“the establishment of dharmas,”
just the intrinsic nature, thus 
“remains”
as it is.
“The perfection of wisdom does not cause any compounded or uncompounded dharma at all”
is teaching that because, having looked, the perfection of wisdom does not see any compounded or uncompounded dharma, it does not cause any dharma. So how will the perfection of wisdom cause anything good or bad?
“But Lord, the uncompounded is good for all noble… is it not?”
It says this intending: does this perfection of wisdom not cause attainment of uncompounded nirvāṇa? It
“is not there to be good or bad for anything” 
means the perfection of wisdom, as a cause, is not in any way good or bad for nirvāṇa. It also teaches that through the simile of 
“the suchness of space.”
“Lord, having trained in the uncompounded perfection of wisdom, do bodhisattva great beings not reach the knowledge of all aspects?”
He asks this intending: does this perfection of wisdom not produce the knowledge of all aspects?
 Having said that, the Lord rejoices in his statement because, when practicing, that is conventionally  so. He then negates it, with
“but not in a dualistic way.”
This means the perfection of wisdom and the knowledge of all aspects are one, they are not different and are not two, therefore there is nothing that assists and nothing that is assisted.
 What is intended by
“Lord, does a nondual dharma reach a nondual dharma?”
It is well known that bodhisattvas reach the knowledge of all aspects with the perfection of wisdom as the cause. In regard to that, he is asking about two possibilities—whether these bodhisattvas without an intrinsic nature reach a perfection of wisdom with a nondual intrinsic nature, or whether bodhisattvas with a dual intrinsic nature reach a perfection of wisdom with a nondual intrinsic nature. 
 The Lord does not assent because it is not suitable to be expressed as either. He says,
“Because neither a dual dharma nor a nondual dharma can be apprehended, the knowledge of all aspects is thus reached by way of not apprehending anything at all.”
Just as all these dharmas cannot be apprehended as being constituted as dual or constituted as being nondual, similarly the knowledge of all aspects is reached by way of dharmas that cannot be apprehended as dual and dharmas that cannot be apprehended as nondual. Other than that, it does not happen at all.
Explanation of Chapters 64 to 72
 Having heard about such a deep state, he says, 
“Deep, Lord, is the perfection of wisdom,” 
and so on. Connect this with this simile as well: understand, as an illustration, that just as a person who wants roots, bark, leaves, flowers, and fruit does not, in the beginning, apprehend them, similarly a bodhisattva  does not apprehend all dharmas. And just as the person gets and makes use of the roots, bark, and so on later when the trunk has grown, similarly all beings are given use of the benefits and happiness when the many accumulations of merit and knowledge have increased and they have gained the knowledge of all aspects. 
“Subhūti, it is because that suchness, on account of which tathāgatas are labeled, is just the suchness… on account of which the suchness of all beings and the suchness of the tathāgatas is labeled.”
The “tathāgatas” are so called because of having gone into reality. Bodhisattvas, too, go into reality, therefore they should indeed be called tathāgatas. 
 In the second subsection of the passage,
“standing in this suchness, bodhisattva great beings,”
because of comprehending and realizing suchness,
“are called tathāgatas.”
This reality is also called 
“the perfection of wisdom.”
 After this, the increase in benefits and merits from practicing suchness and the perfection of wisdom is easy to understand.
“Candidates for bodhisattva”
are those standing on the path to perfect, complete awakening. 
“Subhūti… the knowledge of all aspects is a nonexistent thing that is without a defining mark,”
and so on. It is “a nonexistent thing” because it is beyond existent dharmas; “without a defining mark” because it is separated from specific and general defining marks; 
“without a causal sign”
because it is separated from all words and signifiers;
“without effort”
because it is spontaneous;
“unproduced”
because it is uncompounded;
“and not appearing”
because it is marked as not remaining.
“Subhūti, the objective support of the knowledge of all aspects is a nonexistent thing”
means “it operates having taken a nonexistent thing as the point of departure”; it is not the objective support condition. 
“The dominant factor is mindfulness.”
It says that based on its being its earlier cause.  It is not there at that time. 
“Subhūti, something that has arisen from a union has no intrinsic nature…”
Form, feeling, and so on, which are imaginary in their intrinsic nature, are said to be “arisen from a union” because they have arisen dependent on conditions. Such an intrinsic nature is a nominal one because it is necessarily dependent. 
“And anything arisen from a union with no intrinsic nature is a nonexistent thing.”
A dharma that is contingent on something else—that is not an “intrinsic nature”—is called a “nonexistent thing.” It is not nonexistent because it is absolutely nonexistent like a rabbit’s horns and so on; it is because it is the nonexistent thing that is the reverse of a phenomenon that is an existent thing. 
“Are the intrinsic nature of a nonexistent thing”—
falsely imagined dharmas, form and so on, are called “nonexistent things.” The reversed intrinsic nature they have is also called “the intrinsic nature of a nonexistent thing.” 
 After that it teaches that the perfection of wisdom is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature and is skillful means. 
 There,
“Lord, are phenomena separated from the phenomena themselves?”
means that if all phenomena are separated from all phenomena, in that case something known and something that knows would not exist, and it would not be suitable to say, “It is known.” 
“It is not appropriate that an existent thing knows an existent thing.”
It is not appropriate that a falsely imagined phenomenon knows a falsely imagined phenomenon, like an illusory elephant a footprint of an illusory elephant. 
“It is not appropriate that a nonexistent thing knows a nonexistent thing,”
like space;
“it is not appropriate that an existent thing knows a nonexistent thing,”
like an illusory person space; and
“it is not appropriate that a nonexistent thing knows an existent thing,”
like space an illusory person. This is the perfection of wisdom of existent things and nonexistent things. 
“Lord, is ordinary convention one thing and the ultimate another?” 
An ordinary convention is marked as a nonexistent thing, so the question is about the ultimate. 
“Just that suchness of ordinary convention is the suchness of the ultimate” 
means that the suchness of “ordinary convention”—of all dharmas, form and so on—is itself just the suchness of the ultimate. 
“Subhūti, true reality is called buddha”
says what the intrinsic nature marking an awakened being is. It means true reality, suchness, the dharma body, is called buddha.
“Also, they are those who have fully awakened to the true Dharma, therefore they are called buddha,”
and so on, provides three creative explanations. With the knowledge of a worthy one’s path, the lords awaken to the true Dharma—the state of nirvāṇa; then, with the knowledge of a knower of all aspects they have a penetrating realization of true reality as a reality that is empty, calm, and so on; and with the subsequent attainment of the knowledge of those who know all, they subsequently realize the characteristic marks of all. Thus, it says, because
“there are those who have fully awakened to the true Dharma… have a penetrating realization of true reality, … [and] have fully awakened to all dharmas as they really are, therefore they are called buddha.”
“Lord, what is the word awakening for?”
Awakening is also taught threefold: intrinsic nature, characteristic mark, and creative explanation. The intrinsic nature is twofold: the thoroughly established intrinsic nature and the falsely imagined intrinsic nature. In regard to the thoroughly established intrinsic nature, it says,
“Subhūti, awakening is a word for emptiness.”
In regard to the falsely imagined intrinsic nature, it says,
“Also, Subhūti, awakening is a word for mere designation.”
As for the characteristic mark,  it says
“true reality means awakening.”
The characteristic mark of the ultimate is true reality, called the reality of the ultimate.
 As for the creative explanation, it is threefold:
“that awakening is a realization that all dharmas are a mere designation and causal sign,”
and so on. There, the creative explanation of it as the realization of the marks of falsely imagined phenomena is: “it is a realization that all dharmas are a mere designation and causal sign.” It says about the dharma body’s way of being marked by the transformation of the basis on account of the realization of dependent phenomena, 
“that… is the awakening of the lord buddhas, therefore it is called awakening.”
As for the realization of the mark of the thoroughly established phenomenon, it says
“the lord buddhas have fully awakened to it, therefore it is called awakening.”
In regard to the awakening of those practicing the perfection of wisdom, it says it
“is not to accumulate or to diminish… any dharma.” 
Where it says 
“it is not available in the manner of an objective support that has to be accumulated,”
wholesome roots from giving and so on;
“or that has to be diminished,” 
miserliness, immorality and so on; 
“or that has to be decreased,”
the dark side; 
“or that has to be increased,”
the bright side; 
“or that has to be produced,”
the unproduced buddhadharmas;
“or that has to be stopped,”
defilements that have been produced;
“or that has to be defiled,”
during the period with stains;
“or that has to be purified,”
during the period without stains, it says that because awakening is in its basic nature the elimination of all objective supports.
“Practice the perfection of giving in a dualistic way”
means with apprehended and apprehender as existent things. As it will say immediately after this below, 
“even bodhisattva great beings who have attended on the lord buddhas, have planted wholesome roots, and have been looked after by spiritual friends  will not be able to gain the knowledge of all aspects,”
because, on account of the power of apprehending things, they do not have skillful means. 
“How will… [they] fully grasp the perfection of giving?”
He asks this with the thought that “giving gifts, having taken awakening as the object, is labeled the perfection of giving.”
“[They] do not practice the perfection of giving in a dualistic way”
means they do not practice with the idea, “I will do this for awakening,” conceptualizing the two—an apprehended and an apprehender—as existent things.
“Lord, if they do not practice the perfection of giving in a dualistic way”
is asking: if they are not making a dedication to awakening in a dualistic way, how will the wholesome roots grow and flourish?
“Subhūti, those who practice dualistically do not grow and flourish on wholesome roots”
teaches that just practicing without dualism causes the wholesome roots to grow and flourish, not dualistic practice. This is the practice of the perfection of wisdom without dualism.
 Then the practice of the six perfections endowed with skillful means, the practice of the dharmas on the side of awakening, the practice of the buddhadharmas, and the praise of the bodhisattvas who 
“do not move from their intrinsic nature”
are easy to understand from the scripture itself.
 As for the four possibilities in
“can a nonexistent thing fully awaken to a nonexistent thing,”
and so on, it is not suitable to connect full awakening with those sorts of four possibilities so a scriptural authority for them does not exist. 
“Seeing sameness like this, not like an existent thing and not like a nonexistent thing either, is clear realization.”
A falsely imagined phenomenon, like something conjured up by magic, is not in the form of an existent thing nor in a totally nonexistent form like a rabbit’s horns.  That sameness that is not an existent thing and not a nonexistent thing is seeing, “is clear realization” of the sameness of an existent thing and nonexistent thing—
“the perfection of wisdom without thought construction.”
“To illustrate, Subhūti, worthy ones… having trained on all the paths”—
having trained on the paths of stream enterer, once-returner, non-returner, and worthy one—
“do indeed enter into the flawlessness that is a perfect state,”
do enter into a worthy one’s state of flawlessness. For the moment, they
“will not reach the result of worthy one in a single instant of the path”
means for as long as they have not finally produced the moment of the path of freedom. 
“Through the wisdom of the unique single instant”—
through the instant of
“the vajropama meditative stabilization.”
“Having beheld all eight levels, pass beyond them with knowledge and seeing,”
just as explained earlier in the section teaching knowledge of mastery.
“On that bodhisattva great beings should accomplish vocalizations, conventional terms, and sounds,”
similar to the vocalizations of the various beings. 
“Do not bring about and do not take away any dharma at all”—
he asks: those dharmas on the side of awakening with no characteristic mark, the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, do not bring about awakening, do they? And the Lord raises his voice in praise, with
“exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!”
Nothing at all brings about anything at all, because dharmas are marked by remaining the same. Still, even though that is the case, it formulates this conventionally, as a method so that simple folk will comprehend, because having understood in this gradual sequence and practiced like that, they become awakened. 
“Noble Dharma and Vinaya”
teaches that in its intrinsic nature it tames attachment  and so on, and, when it has been achieved, is marked by remaining tamed. This 
“noble Dharma and Vinaya”
is the
“perfection of wisdom.”
“The disintegration of meditation on all dharmas is meditation”
means meditating on “all dharmas,” form and so on, as nonexistent things.
“[They] do not meditate on ‘form is an existent thing’ ”
means they do not meditate on “form is an existent thing in its intrinsic nature.”
“Someone attached to the two extremes, thinking ‘this is me,’ in reference to an existent thing”—
this means someone attached to the two extremes of permanence and annihilation with the notion of an existent thing: “This is me, which is to say, I exist separately,” “I am form,” “I am feeling,” and so on.
“Subhūti, the perception of form is a duality.”
There is no doubt that where there is the perception “it is form,” the false imagining that it is there or it is not there, or that it is an existent thing or a nonexistent thing, arises. Alternatively, it says “duality” because of a grasped and grasper in the form of existent things.
“To the extent there is an existent thing, to that extent there are volitional factors.”
The conceptualization of an existent thing gives rise to volitional factors that are good, bad, and so on. To “thoroughly reject an existent thing” is not to thoroughly reject the maturation.
“[They] gain control over all dharmas,”
over perfect, complete awakening;
“[they] gain control over the range of all phenomena,”
the clairvoyances and the ten controls.
“Here, earlier when I was practicing the bodhisattva’s practice of the six perfections,”
and so on, is teaching the following:
“When I was the one practicing the six perfections and entering into absorption in the clairvoyances and so on, having eliminated perceptions with any objective support, I produced and practiced  a naturally purified perception without relishing the experience of the causal signs. Having fully awakened by just paying attention to space, and, following that, having fully awakened to the four noble truths with subsequent attainment knowledge, I actualized the qualities of a buddha. By paying attention to the conventional I prophesied beings in the three groups.”
This means he was therefore faultless because he practiced in a state where nothing is apprehended and became awakened in a state where nothing is apprehended.
 With,
“Lord, how has a tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha,”
and so on, the elder is asking: if concentrations, clairvoyances, and beings are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, how have you produced them, and prophesied those beings? Then the Lord, with 
“Subhūti, were an intrinsic nature of sense objects or of wrong unwholesome dharmas,”
and so on, teaches that because they are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature everything is established, not otherwise. So, it is because sense objects and wrong unwholesome dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature that they have been prophesied and the concentrations produced. They
“are not existent things, or nonexistent things, or intrinsically existent things, or dependently existent things”
is teaching that they are not constituted as falsely imagined existent things, are not totally nonexistent things like a rabbit’s horns, also are not something constituted as its own existent thing, and are also not something constituted as a dependent existent thing. 
“How… will there be serial action, serial training, and serial practice?” 
The intention is that just as apprehending and not apprehending a magically produced illusory elephant and so on happens suddenly, so too the bodhisattvas’ realization that does not apprehend anything happens suddenly; it does not happen gradually. 
 With
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings from the very outset have heard from the lord buddhas… that an intrinsic nature… is nonexistent,”
and so on, the Lord explains that bodhisattvas are not vigorously attempting the series of practices for their own benefit; rather, they are gradually making the vigorous attempt so that all beings will come to a gradual understanding, because they are incapable of a sudden understanding. 
“Starting from the first production of the thought,”
 and so on, teaches the order of the unfolding series.
“Having [transcended the śrāvaka level and pratyekabuddha level], they enter,”
after they have produced the thought.
“Do you think you can apprehend a ‘there-is’ or a ‘there-is-not’ in all the phenomena that are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature” 
and that are the intrinsic nature of six perfections? If taken as nonexistence, it becomes an annihilation. Those who say they are not existent things, and they are intrinsic natures, say there are not existent things and say there are intrinsic natures, so it is teaching that it is not suitable to take them at the extremes of “there-is” and “there-is-not.”
“Just the absence of an apprehended object is attainment, just the attainment of the absence of an apprehended object is clear realization.”
If it had said “attainment is without an apprehended object, and clear realization does not apprehend an object,” there would be something to be attained and a clear realization to be had, so there would be the absence of an apprehended object and hence the colossal blunder of apprehending something. Therefore it teaches that just the absence of an apprehended object is spoken of as “attainment… clear realization,” and 
“unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
“How will there be the clairvoyances arisen from maturation?”
The clairvoyances arisen from maturation and the perfections arisen from maturation are located from the eighth level on up.
 All of the explanation of serial practice is easy to understand.
 In regard to the question, 
“Lord, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, how do they complete the six perfections in a single thought?”
and so on, it says 
“when they give gifts it is informed by the perfection of wisdom,”
explaining that because they are informed by the perfection of wisdom all beings also become one.
“Nothing other than”
means simply just the one. 
 Then again, in response to the second question, it explains that it is a single thought because it is not a dualistic thought. The cultivation of all dharmas, the six perfections and so on, while 
“not having a dualistic notion”
is easy to understand. 
“When they give gifts with a thought free from causal signs, without outflows, the perfection of maturation is completed.”
It teaches that, because from the eighth level on up afflictions do not arise and it is a maturation. 
“This gift you have given is worthless”
is said by the Māra class of gods. 
 Then the completion of the six perfections and the maturation of the clairvoyances can be grasped from the text itself. It is also very easy to understand the exposition of the perfections arisen from maturation from the teaching about the knowledge of the mark of all dharmas.
Explanation of Chapter 73
Then the question,
“Lord, how, when all dharmas are like a dream, have nonexistence for their intrinsic nature, and are empty of their own marks,”
and so on—the response is that the teaching is amazing and marvelous, and the two gifts of Dharma, the ordinary and extraordinary, should be grasped right from the scripture itself.
 Among the extraordinary gifts of Dharma, most have already been explained. I will explain the ones I have not explained before. Among them is, 
“What is conflict-free meditative stabilization?”
Having become absorbed in a meditative stabilization sustained by the power of the thought “may afflictions not arise in others on account of me,” through the force  of the earlier prayer that is a vow that does not provide an opportunity for afflictions to arise in the mindstreams of others, is called “conflict-free absorption.”
“There, what is knowledge from prayer?”
Immediately after a prayer has been made to know some phenomenon included in knowable things—anything at all from the phenomena of the three time periods and three realms included in the ordinary and extraordinary—that knowledge through which it comes to be known is called “knowledge from prayer.”
“There, what are the four total purities?”
The absolute separation from the “basis”—all the final bases of suffering with which all beings are afflicted—and the independence to appropriate, remain in, and die in whatever body one wants is the
“thoroughly purified basis.”
Control gained over what are counted as magical productions and transformations, and over objective supports, is the 
“thoroughly purified objective support.”
The increase of the wholesome in the mind to the fullest extent because of separation from the final basis of mental suffering is the
“thoroughly purified mind.”
Control over the absence of obstructions to the knowledge of all knowable things because of separation from the final basis of suffering that is on the side of ignorance is 
“thoroughly purified knowledge.”
 There what are the ten controls? 
“Control over lifespan”
is remaining for as long as they want;
“control over mind”
is the abiding at will in the mental abiding in which they want to abide, in a concentration, an immeasurable, a deliverance, and so on;
“control over necessities”
is being endowed at will with all necessities, food and so on, immediately after just having the idea of them;
“control over action”
is the transformation at will  of all actions that evolve into birth;
“control over birth”
is the birth at will in all birthplaces, in whichever birth they desire;
“control over belief”
is the accomplishing of real things, whatever they are just as they have believed them to be;
“control over prayer”
is this—all their prayers being answered at will;
“control over magical powers”
is the accomplishing of all necessary magical powers at will;
“control over knowledge”
is the speedy knowledge of what they want to know—those very deep things to be known; and
“control over the doctrine”
is the skill at gaining, at will, collections of speech sounds, collections of words, and collections of phrases, and making a perfect presentation of all the doctrine.
“What are the three things the tathāgatas do not have to guard against?”
The three things they do not have to guard against are easy to understand from the scripture itself.
“[The] three applications of mindfulness”
are easy to understand as the absence of attachment and anger.
“A natural state not robbed of mindfulness”—
in whatever way and at whatever time the tathāgatas work for the welfare of beings, when it is accomplished, at that time it is called the “natural state not robbed of mindfulness.”
Major marks and minor signs of a buddha
“What are the thirty-two major marks of a great person?”
These are presented to engender faith in persons who take the body as the measure of greatness. There, bodhisattva great beings and buddhas are called
“great person”
because of their great humanity on account of great lineage, belief, prayer, vigorous attempt, setting out, practice that accomplishes the final result, wisdom and skillful means, and so on. Because they are great persons, these make that clear so they are the “major marks of a great person.” 
 Qualm: Well then,  the number “thirty-two” is meaningless because there is no difference between the major or minor parts of their body when appearing as a great person, so it is not appropriate to think “there are this many.” 
 That is true, but still, the specific number is tailored to the type of experience that follows from studying and being mindful so here too the explanation is with just that number. 
 The explanation of these major marks, furthermore, is in four parts: overview, explanation, cause, and result. 
 The first is the brief teaching; then, the commentary on the major marks is the explanation, the description of earlier karma the cause, and what they presage is the result. 
“They have wheel marks on the surfaces of their hands and feet.”
Ordinarily a wheel is of two kinds: a wheel that is a weapon and the locomotion wheel, such as a wagon wheel and so on. They occur on both their hands and also their feet. The earlier karma for them is twofold: one, included in the perfection of morality, is listed as having
“welcomed and accompanied gurus.”
This results in the appearance of locomotion wheels on the soles of their feet. The one included in the perfection of giving is having
“listened to the doctrine, strung garlands, visited temples and caityas, and given the gift of servants.”
This results in their appearance on the palms of both hands.
“Wheels with a thousand spokes, with rims and hubs”—
when these three are not complete it signifies that, having become wheel-turning emperors, they will go forth to homelessness. At that time, they will not become completely awakened, like, for example, King Śaṅka. When they have become complete in every respect they will become completely awakened,  therefore it says 
“complete in every respect.”
 Qualm: Among these, the various other signs taught in other sūtras—the śrīvatsa, svastika, vardhamāna, full pot, joined fish, victory banner, conch shell, throne, white parasol, fly whisk, and so on—have not been taught, have they? 
 That is true, but still, when it explains the main one—being endowed with the major wheel sign—it indicates those as well. 
Some say all the major marks that do not appear on the two feet of a tathāgata are not absent because they are included as the necessary insignia of a universal emperor. Hence, it says “complete in every respect.”
“It is a sign presaging an extremely large circle of servants.”
This is shared by wheel-turning emperors and buddhas. Because it has a hub and spokes, and is held by a rim, it is similar to “an extremely large circle of servants.”
“Feet that are well placed”—
lord buddhas are not like others for whom the ground is uneven, the soles of whose feet are not flat, or who plant the point of the foot or a side of the foot or the heel on the ground when walking, or who bound along taking breaks in the middle. The whole sole of their foot is flat, lands on the ground when walking, touches the ground evenly, so it is said they have “feet that are well placed.” The entire face of the earth is even and has no change in elevation, no pebbles, boulders, water, mud, thorns, pits and so on, and as rulers over many hundreds and thousands of world systems even the distant is close by. Teaching the earlier karma it says
“their commitment is firm.”
It says this because in regard to all undertakings, on account of the force of the sustaining power of truth, renunciation, peace, and wisdom,  nobody can make them break it. 
“It is a sign presaging that they cannot be swayed.”
They all—Māra, opponents, tīrthikas and so on—cannot sway them.
“Hands and feet with connecting webbing”—
from the first finger joint there is no gap in between the fingers on hands with totally stunning “connecting webbing,” but still they are suited for slipping on jewelry such as a ring and so on. And the earlier karma is because of
“their assiduous practice of the four ways of gathering a retinue.”
It is explained that both their hands have “connecting webbing,” because of the force of gathering a retinue 
“by giving”
and so on; and both their feet have “connecting webbing” because of the force of the other three ways—
“consistency between words and deeds,”
and so on. 
Alternatively, they are understood to have come about from two hands gathering a retinue. The beings who have been gathered into the retinue have touched the feet. The appearance of the fingers and toes is with no gaps.
They are like “the four ways of gathering a retinue” because they gather and have become soft. 
“The speedy gathering of a retinue”—
this means the eight retinues quickly gather for the explanation of the Dharma. 
Someone else explains “hands and feet with connecting webbing” differently. Setting aside the two thumbs on the hands of the lord buddhas, the tips of all the fingers are aligned, that is, the fingers are marked by each being connected with each part, standing aligned like a lattice work window or the tops of columns, so, on all the toes and fingers all the marks of each joint line appear aligned so they appear like a lattice; thus they have “hands and feet with connecting webbing.”
It is said, “When unimportant beings touch the two feet of a tathāgata there is an extremely pleasant feeling, and after death they are born in the ranks of the gods. Such is the power of feet with that major sign—connecting webbing.” 
“Delicate and soft feet and hands”— 
because “delicate” means pliable, and “soft” means having a perfect hue. 
“Stands out prominently in seven ways,”
because they—
“the backs of their hands and upper parts of their feet, shoulders, neck, and head”—
are parts that have filled out. The earlier karma is the
“perfectly prepared hard and soft food and drink.” 
From having given what has been perfectly prepared, their hands and feet have become “delicate and soft”; from having given many things to eat, “the parts stand out prominently in seven ways.” Alternatively, they went on their feet and gave with their two hands. Alternatively, their two hands and feet have become like that because, having given with their two hands, beings have served at their feet. “The parts stand out prominently in seven ways” because they are similar to the seven mental constituents that have been satisfied.
 How do you know that one karma gives rise to two major signs? 
The explanation is that even though it is taken as being one karma, it accomplishes two or even three major signs on account of its being done and accumulated to an extreme degree.
“They have long toes and fingers.”
What goes wrong in fingers that are too long, too short, too fat, too thin, and crooked, and so on, has been eliminated. There is nothing wrong with them, and they are in correct proportion relative to the palms of the hands, are of proper length, and are gradually filled out and have slender tips. They are called “long fingers.” 
They have 
“stretched-out heels”
because they have heels free from what goes wrong in heels. They are of proper length and in correct proportion  relative to the feet. There, having taken the entire sole of the foot as having four parts, when three parts are the foot and one part is the heel, it is “of proper length.”
They have 
“a big… body”
because they have a perfect build and are tall in height;
“and a straight body,”
because unlike those of other persons they do not bend.
“[It] is not crooked”
anywhere from the shoulders, waist, or knees.
In this “long toes and fingers and stretched-out heels,” the locutions “long” and “stretched-out” are words for proportionate and fitting; they are not words for very long and very stretched out. 
Also, in regard to the explanation of the earlier karma, 
“because they have freed convicts condemned to death, have sustained life by giving food and drink and so on, and assiduously practiced abstaining from killing”—
having freed those who are going to be killed from having a short life, those humans remain in their ordinary life, they do not suddenly come to live a longer life; and similarly, giving them all that is required for sustaining themselves, they make it so that they do not have a shortened life, but do not suddenly make them have a longer life. Similarly, also, with the toes and fingers and heels here, the “long” is a nontruncated state; it is not additional length. 
“At seven hasta they are elevated in height.”
They are elevated in height relative to an ordinary body. Take this as the measure of an ordinary body. You cannot with certainty take the measure of the body of the Lord because, having looked for the top of the head, it cannot be seen. Because of
“abstaining from killing”
their physical karma is not twisted, similar to “a straight body.” 
“Lower legs from the feet up that are not knobby”— 
prominent bones of the knee joints and ankle joints are said to be “knobby.” In others those two bones are big, so the feet and calves are not attractive. Movement is not easy because they are not flexible, so the movement is unattractive. The calves of the Lord are attractive because the joints do not show; they are flexible, so the movement is attractive.
 Others say, “The ankle bones of ordinary humans are toward the back of the foot, so their feet look like they have been nailed on. They are not flexible so they cannot be turned freely, therefore when they move, the soles of the feet do not show.”
 The ankle bones of great persons are higher up on the foot. Also, only the lower parts of their bodies move, the upper parts  do not appear to move. Their feet can be turned easily. When you look from the front, back, right, and left, the soles of the feet appear and the movement is attractive. 
“Body hair that points upward”—
when the hairs on the bodies of great persons grow in the follicles, they grow pointing upward toward the top, like looking upward at a beautiful face. 
 Again, just as the earlier karma,
“the wholesome dharmas they have undertaken,”
grow higher and higher, the parts of the legs are higher, and the body hair faces upward. The similarity is in the appearance of height.
“Calves like the aiṇeya antelope”—
those who have calves that are like those of the black antelope are said to have “calves like the aiṇeya antelope.” The calves of ordinary humans have flesh that hangs down in one part, or they wobble or are too thick or too long or too short. Those of great persons have flesh that is compact, and they taper, are evenly shaped, very spherical, and well built, occupying only the space of eighteen aṅgula.
 Again, the earlier karma is
“having shown respect, they have made vocations and branches of knowledge available” 
so those trainees have increased and flourished, and by having made necessary goods available they have become strong. The calves are similar to that because the muscles have developed and have become like the calves of the black antelope.
“It is a sign presaging a speedy grasp of things.”
Those great persons quickly grasp all the buddhas have said, and the tathāgatas also grasp in a single instant the stream of questions of all beings.
“Tubular and long arms”—
“tubular” because they are big, thick arms; “long” because they reach down to their knees. They are long. Again, the earlier karma is similar because they extended their arms out a long way giving gifts to others, and because the doctrine they give is vast. 
“[Their] private parts are hidden in a sheath.”
The “private part” is a secret that is a private part, hence “private part.” About that private part hidden in a sheath, not present before the eyes, it says the “private part  is hidden in a sheath.” It means the private part portion is hidden in the sheath and not present before the eyes, like a golden colored lotus flower hidden in the sheath of the surrounding calyx. Again, the earlier karma is
“[they] reconciled friends and relatives and did not separate”
them and so on. A sheath and a private part are similar in that way. They are similar because on account of something that can be hidden the secret portion was not obvious. 
“A color like gold”—
this teaches that their body is dense, glossy, and has a very clear color. 
“Extremely fine skin”—
this teaches that inner and outer 
“dirt particles”
and stains and so on do not 
“stick to it.”
Here, washing hands and feet and needing to be washed and so on is done by way of conventional designation so those who look after them will get merit, and to fit in at the appropriate times.
“Each strand of body hair grows curling to the right”—
“each strand of body hair” because from their body hair follicle grows just a single strand of body hair; “curling to the right” because they are circular, like an ornamental coiling snake ring, or the circle of a coiling snake, both of which coil to the right. 
“An ūrṇā marks their face.”
When there is a pliable, soft body hair, white in color and glossy, in the spot between the eyebrows, a full hasta or a pair of hasta or three hasta and so on in length when it is stretched out, that, when let go again, coils to the right with the tip on the upper part, just the measure of an Indian gooseberry fruit, like an egg-shaped drop of silver, beautifying whatever face it is on, it is said that “an ūrṇā marks their face.” The earlier karma is that
“they have avoided society, and accorded an appropriate status to parents and so on, served them, given them gifts, not displeased them,”
and so on. That is for both these major marks. On account of that, those strands grow curling to the right and the ūrṇā is long and has an excellent shape. 
“[Their] upper body is like a lion’s.”
Their upper body is like a lion’s upper body so  they have an “upper body like a lion’s.” It says this because their chest is broad and big in size—perfectly broad and big because it is filled out.
“[Their] shoulders are well rounded without an indentation at the throat.”
Put the word “well” together with “rounded.” The “rounded” teaches that the Adam’s apple does not show. This means it is spherical and compact like the neck of a golden pot.
 Again, the earlier karma is
“[they] did not speak unkindly,”
similar in style to a lion, the cause of a beautiful throat;
“did not belittle others,”
the cause of the chest being broad like a lion’s; and being
“eloquent and not jarring, and their speech is the same as the roar of a lion,”
the cause of a beautiful neck.
“The part between the collarbones is filled in”—
the part between the collarbones is expanded and broad. 
“They know tastes as tasty.”
Those who know the tastes of the six tastes are said to “know tastes as tasty.” In this context, take to “know” as to like, as in “treats like a mother, treats like a father” and so on. Because they enjoy and are satisfied by the tastes, it is said they “know the tastes.” The gullets of great persons have seven thousand receptive tastebuds giving rise to the experience. If they eat even as little as a single tiny sesame seed, it spreads throughout the entire body. When all tastes are introduced to the mouth they become like the taste of nectar. That is the karma of the major mark. How it is similar to the earlier karma is easy to understand.
“A build like an Indian fig tree”—
some say nya gro means beneath. Take this as the lower part of the body. Take the ro dha as the upper part of the body. Their build is the same. So, when the upper part and the lower part of their body, starting from the waist, are equal in size it is said that they have “a build like an Indian fig tree.”
 Others say take the nya gro to be from the top of the head down to the feet; take the ro dha as the width; and take the build as the two outstretched arms. So there, when the height and width of their body is the same length of their two outstretched arms, it is said that they have “a build like an Indian fig tree.”
 Some say the trunk and branches of an Indian fig tree are equal in height and width. All the bodies of great persons are like that, the same in being the size of two extended arms.
“[They] have an uṣṇīṣa on the top of their head”—
take this as a head like a bound turban. It is explained that the heads of others are not fully developed, are elongated or squashed and are not symmetrical. The heads of great persons are arranged evenly like a turban, spherical, completed, well shaped, and well developed. 
 Others say this major sign is to teach that the forehead is fully developed in size. The flesh in between and above the right ear and the left ear of the foreheads of great persons is well shaped; the size of the forehead is fully completed and beautiful like a royal golden turban that has been bound on. 
 Again, the earlier karma is that they were 
“first”—
they were chief 
“at doing”
all wholesome actions, making
“parks, assembly halls,”
places to quench thirst and so on—therefore 
“they have a build like a fig tree,” 
and 
“an uṣṇīṣa on the top of their head,”
because, having become chief in the assembly, they raised their head uncowed and fearlessly encouraged others to engage in these actions. Hence,
“these are signs that presage holding the highest office.”
“A long thin tongue”:
“long”—big or lengthy; “thin”—pliable.
“The voice of Brahmā”—
because it is a voice like Brahmā, or the finest voice.
“The call of the kalaviṅka bird”—
like the sound of the Indian cuckoo.
“They have lion-like jaws”
because they are similar in part to the moon on the twelfth day before it is full, and the edges of the jaws are muscled and excellently rounded.
“Very white teeth,”
because they shine; 
“extremely white,”
even more than the planet Venus. 
“Even teeth,”
because they 
“are not too long or too short,”
or uneven.
“Teeth without gaps”—
because there are 
“no spaces between their teeth,”
and so on, they are good looking.
“Forty teeth,”
because while other humans have thirty-two or thirty-eight teeth, on the contrary their teeth number forty and are complete.
“Dark blue eyes”—
the globe in the middle of the round of their eyes is moist and black. The two edges of the black globe are white. When the two eyelashes are still, they remain moist and dark blue. The two corners are a little bit redder. In between the eyelashes and eye is like a golden color. Thus, even though they do have the five clarities of sense faculties, still, because the circle of the eye is the foremost, it says “dark blue eyes.”
“[Their] eyelashes are like those of a cow,”
because, like a calf that right from birth has a youth’s eyelashes, the color of 
“the upper and lower eyelashes”
is extremely glossy, and they are
“not entangled, so… [their] eyelashes are like those of a cow.” 
“Eighty minor signs”—
they are called “minor signs” because they subsequently expand on the major marks or are subsequently divided in conformity with the major marks, that is, they indicate that they are great persons or make them handsome in conformity with the major marks. 
“Lord buddhas have nails with a color like copper”
is an explanation of a minor sign. They
“are isolated from all conditioned things”
is its corresponding cause. Connect them all like that.
“Bodhisattva great beings gather beings with those six perfections, by kind words.”
Having brought them into the fold with kind words, they gather them into a retinue with the six perfections, so “kind words” is in the list.
“They have gathered beings… with those same six perfections by… beneficial actions.”
The aspiration to do something of benefit goes ahead of the six perfections that gather them into a retinue.  Connect the later ones like that as well.
“Become skilled at one syllable accomplishment.”
Through the sequence of dhāraṇī letters as gateways—“the letter a is the door to all dharmas because they are unproduced from the very beginning,” and so on—they should, through one letter, become skilled at the accomplishment of the signlessness meditative stabilization.
“Know through one syllable that all have a decline.”
To have a decline is to decline. This means compounded phenomena have a complete change. 
“Meditate on forty-five syllables being included in one syllable.”
Meditate on the meditative stabilizations of all the syllables being included in the a that accomplishes the nonproduction meditative stabilization. 
“Meditate on one syllable being included in forty-five syllables.”
Meditate on the meditative stabilizations of the forty-five syllables being in just the a. 
“All dharmas, Subhūti, being the appearance of that for which there are no letters, are magical creations.”
This means they are generated as an appearance of the inexpressible dharma-constituent.
 With
“how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom arisen from maturation,”
and so on, he is asking: If
“a being… and a dharma… cannot be apprehended,”
which is to say, do not appear when they practice what has arisen from maturation because what has arisen from maturation is an absence of conceptual thinking, how could they give an explanation of the Dharma? How, given that they would be connecting them with dharmas on the side of awakening that do not exist, would they not
“be connecting them with error?”
 Having asked that, 
the Lord said, “Exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!” 
and so on, delighting in those words. 
“Having thus seen that all those dharmas are empty, teach the doctrine to beings,”
and so on, teaches that although it is true that Subhūti,  beings, and dharmas are empty, still beings do not know them as emptiness. Hence the Lord teaches the doctrine in order that they will know, and when he teaches the doctrine, he teaches the doctrine so that one way or the other it does not disagree with that emptiness.
“They see that all dharmas are without obscurations”
means they see them separated from falsely imagined obscurations, as absolutely pure.
 The similarity based on the analogy of a tathāgata’s magical creation has been dealt with already.
“By way of their not being bound and not being freed”—
during the period when the true dharmic nature of form has stains it is a falsely imagined thing isolated from an intrinsic nature, so it is “not bound”; and even during the period when it is stainless there is no purification plucked out of thin air, so it is “not freed.” 
“Form’s state of not being bound and not being freed is not form.”
The “state of not being bound and not being freed” is the thoroughly established state. This means it is not the intrinsic nature of a falsely imagined form.
“Are absolutely pure”—
“in their basic nature” is intended.
“Something nonexistent is not located in something nonexistent,”
because it does not rest on it, just as, to illustrate, space is not located in space. 
“Something’s own existence is not located in something nonexistent,”
because it does not exist, just as, to illustrate, sharpness is not located in a rabbit’s horns and so on.
“And something else’s existence is not located in something nonexistent or in something’s own existence,”
because both something else’s existence and something’s own existence are nonexistent. Connect the others like that as well. 
“The lord buddhas, the bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, worthy ones, and all the noble beings understand just that true dharmic nature of dharmas”
teaches that all have  just the one clear dharma realization. 
“Without going beyond that true dharmic nature of dharmas”—
when giving an exposition of the Dharma they do not go beyond that. 
“Subhūti, the dharma-constituent does not go beyond anything, and suchness and the very limit of reality do not go beyond anything either.”
Take them specifically with their particulars: the lord buddhas’ “dharma-constituent,” which is to say, dharma body, does not go beyond anything; the bodhisattvas’ “suchness” does not go beyond anything; and the śrāvakas’ and pratyekabuddhas’ “very limit of reality” does not go beyond anything.
“Because they have no intrinsic nature that goes beyond anything”
means an intrinsic nature that can be gone beyond does not exist. 
“Lord, if, in the dharma-constituent, there is no going beyond, and in suchness and at the very limit of reality there is no going beyond,”
and so on, poses the following question: Form, feeling, and so on are in their intrinsic nature changeable, so it appears they go beyond something. Thus, there is a going beyond something when it comes to form and so on, but there is none when it comes to the dharma-constituent and so on, so, at that time are form and so on and the dharma-constituent and so on different?
“No, Subhūti,” the Lord replied,
and so on, teaches that the dharmas—form, feeling, and so on—and the three, the dharma-constituent and so on, are not different. The intention of this is that “ultimate form does not go beyond anything.”
 Then the elder Subhūti said,
“Lord, if form is not one thing and the dharma-constituent is not another,”
and so on—he asks: if there is no difference between form, feeling, and so on, and the dharma-constituent and so on, well then, will there not be 
“a detailed presentation of the results”
of wholesome and unwholesome actions because  all dharmas will be uncompounded just as the dharma-constituent and so on are? Then the Lord says, 
“Subhūti, … based on conventional truth,”
and so on. This is saying that even though all phenomena are uncompounded in their intrinsic nature, nevertheless for 
“simple… folk,”
who make them into falsely imagined objects, there are falsely imagined wholesome and unwholesome things, and through the force of that there are also bright and bad maturations. The Lord, governed by that, has given an exposition of them by way of their being “conventional truth.” Ultimately all dharmas are the intrinsic nature of suchness, so
“an exposition of a detailed presentation of”
karma and maturation is impossible because ultimately they 
“are undifferentiated”—
those dharmas “are undifferentiated,” are not something that can be expressed, hence they are
“not something that can be talked about,”
and thus
“name and form are not produced and do not stop, are not defiled and not purified.”
From among the formless phenomena and form phenomena, saying “name” and “form” is conventional truth mode. Ultimately that suchness is thoroughly established and hence is undifferentiated. It cannot be expressed, so it is “not something that can be talked about.” It is uncompounded so it is “not produced”; it is not produced so it does “not stop”; it is isolated from an intrinsic nature so it is “not defiled”; and it is pure in its intrinsic nature so it is “not purified.” 
“They are an emptiness of what transcends limits and an emptiness of no beginning and no end.”
Those same phenomena, undifferentiated and so on, are talked about as the two emptinesses. 
Subhūti said, “Lord, if the detailed presentation of results is based on conventional truth,” 
and so on. He is asking: if you are going to make a presentation  of results that are unreal why would you not make a presentation of 
“simple, ordinary folk,”
and so on,
“in the result of stream enterer,”
and so on? 
Then the Lord said, “Subhūti, were simple, ordinary folk to know the conventional truth or the ultimate truth,” 
and so on. He is saying that while there is no detailed presentation of results, nevertheless there is a presentation of the falsely imagined result of stream enterer, and so on, because of the comprehension of falsely imagined things. Simple, ordinary folk do not comprehend, therefore they do not cultivate the path. Noble persons do comprehend, therefore just for them there should be a detailed presentation of the path, and what is not the path, and the results.
 The elder Subhūti asks,
“Lord, when they have become habituated to the path”
as cause,
“does the result appear and do they attain the result?”
If it does, it would happen just as an ultimate.
 Then the Lord said, 
“No, Subhūti. The result does not appear, and they do not attain the result from having become habituated to the path.”
He has refuted both the path and result because they are falsely imagined phenomena.
“Nor, Subhūti, do they attain the result from having not become habituated to the path.”
This is explaining that they are falsely imagined phenomena, but not arbitrary.
“A result to be attained with the path does not exist, it will not be attained with what is not the path, and it does not exist on the path either”
teaches the certification of dharmas. 
“In the dharma-constituent they do not make a presentation of the results by way of apportioning them.”
This means that in the dharma-constituent,  having apportioned them like that, there is ultimately no detailed presentation.
 With
“Lord, if the compounded element and uncompounded element have not been apportioned,”
and so on, the elder Subhūti asks why, then, has a detailed presentation been given having specified particular abandonments, paths, and results. Then the Lord said,
 “Subhūti, … is the result of stream enterer… compounded or… uncompounded?”
and so on. Ultimately they have no stages of comprehension and awakening. Thus the “result of stream enterer,” and so on, are uncompounded and in them there is no division into stages. Therefore, given that they are all an awakening to emptiness, none has been apportioned.
Explanation of Chapters 74 to 82
“Lord, how have… they realized well what marks dharmas as dharmas”
means how have they, if ultimately there is no realization of what has not been apportioned. 
“Lord, how do they meditate on the path of a magical creation?”
is asked using the analogy of a magical creation. 
“Subhūti, it is based on meditating on a path,”
and so on, says the achievement is just analogous to a magical creation. 
“Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings realize all dharmas that are nonexistent things”
means how, if they are nonexistent, is there a realization? There is no achievement of the realization of a rabbit’s horns and so on. 
“Is there any existent thing apprehended in a tathāgata’s magical creation, thanks to which it is defiled and is purified?”
This teaches that for the tathāgatas there is no defilement and there is no purification. There is no realization because the forms of suffering life and liberation are similar; it is nothing at all because it is simply posited as just nonexistent. 
“Lord, … if the five forms of life in saṃsāra from which beings will be liberated do not exist, how is there going to be a bodhisattva’s personal heroic power?”
This means that in its basic nature saṃsāra is unreal, so in its intrinsic nature it is liberated. 
Then the Lord said, “What do you think, Subhūti,” 
and so on. Bodhisattvas do not see beings or a cycle of existences. Those analogies of a dream and so on teach that they did see earlier, but beings do not know they are nonexistent, so their “personal heroic power” is causing them to understand.
“Subhūti, if, just on their own, beings knew that all dharmas are like a dream, up to are like a magical creation,”
and so on, teaches just that. 
“The basic nature of all dharmas is name because they point somewhere.”
All falsely imagined dharmas with a falsely imagined basic nature are called “name.” Therefore, they point like that to that intellectually active mind of beings, or that basic nature points to that intellectually active mind.
 With
“is signlessness one thing and śrāvaka dharmas another?” 
and so on, the Lord explains that if, given that all dharmas are signless, he had presented śrāvaka dharmas and so on as having signs, then there would be a fault, but because they are all signless there is therefore no fault.
“Does that not complicate the dharma-constituent?”
This means it would complicate it, because, when they realize defining marks in dharmas that have no defining marks, they would grasp each differently even though they are in fact suchness.
“Subhūti, the dharma-constituent  would be complicated if there were to be any other dharma not included in the dharma-constituent,”
and so on. With this the Lord teaches that even though they conceive of dharmas like that, still, later they realize with wisdom that all are not different because of having the dharma-constituent as their intrinsic nature. Therefore, they do not complicate the dharma-constituent. 
“Subhūti, the form constituent is the dharma-constituent”
is the suchness of form. 
“Do they train in form?”
Subhūti is asking: since all dharmas are exhausted in the dharma-constituent, the dharmas, form and so on, would be absolutely nonexistent, so, when they train in them would it not be similar to an error? 
“Are aware of all dharmas as they really are, the dharma-constituent,”
and so on, says: They see the dharmas, form and so on, as just the dharma-constituent, not as something else. They cannot inspire beings to take it up in some other way, so they teach the dharma-constituent with skillful means, having designated form and so on as signlessness. 
“Subhūti, if the dharma-constituent were not exactly the same later as it was before, and if it were not like that in between as well,”
and so on, is teaching: “before,” at the time of a foolish, ordinary person, the dharma-constituent was impure; “in between,” at the time of a bodhisattva, it is pure and impure; and “later,” at the end, it is absolutely pure. So far so good, but you should not understand from this that there are specific features there. In its intrinsic nature it is pure at all times, pure in its absolutely pure nature. 
“Subhūti, having taken the very limit of reality as the measure”
is saying: Bodhisattvas do not practice the perfection of wisdom for the sake of beings, they practice for the sake of the very limit of reality. Thus, having set aside nonexistent beings  because they are not existent, they establish them in the very limit of reality that is their intrinsic nature. The very limit of beings is made into the very limit of reality.
“Lord, if just the very limit of reality is also the limit of beings”
is asking: if a “limit of beings” were not to exist as anything other than the very limit of reality, well then, beings and the very limit of reality would be the same, so what you have said, that they
“establish beings at the very limit of reality” 
would not be right. If they were to establish just that in that, they would be saying “the very limit of reality enters into the very limit of reality,” and that is not right either. 
 The Lord says, 
“With skillful means they establish the limit of beings at the very limit of reality without complicating the very limit of reality.”
An intrinsic nature does not enter into an intrinsic nature. Having eliminated a falsely imagined limit of beings and a falsely imagined real basis of beings with skillful means, they establish them in their intrinsic nature, which is absolutely pure suchness, “establishing them at the very limit of reality.” Therefore, this means that the very limit of reality and the limit of beings are an undivided unity, 
“are not two.”
 Then he asks,
“What are the skillful means?”
And 
“Subhūti, here, starting from the first production of the thought, bodhisattva great beings,”
and so on, teaches that having transformed all dharmas into the very limit of reality, the completion of the six perfections is skillful means.
 The instruction in the perfections is easy to understand.
“Lord, if all phenomena are empty of a basic nature, and if in the emptiness of a basic nature a being is not apprehended, nor are a dharma and a path apprehended,”
and so on, asks the following:  if all phenomena are empty of an intrinsic nature and “a being… a dharma, and a path” do not exist,
“how will bodhisattva great beings,” 
having brought beings to maturity, having purified a buddhafield, and having cultivated the knowledge of path aspects,
“stand in the knowledge of all aspects?”
 Then the Lord, with
“Subhūti, were all phenomena not empty of a basic nature,”
and so on, teaches that if dharmas or paths were to exist separately, it would be right to apprehend something, and in that case there would be all living beings and so on, and bodhisattvas would not, therefore, having stood in emptiness, become buddhas, and would not explain all dharmas, form and so on, as emptiness. But there are no such dharmas or paths in the emptiness of a basic nature. Therefore, that emptiness is established. Having stood in emptiness they therefore become buddhas and explain all the emptiness dharmas. Hence it is established that they enter into the knowledge of all aspects thanks to the emptiness of a basic nature. 
 He continues with
“Subhūti, if inner emptiness were not empty of a basic nature,”
and so on, teaching that not only the trivial dharmas, form and so on, are empty, but that the sixteen emptinesses, inner emptiness and so on, are empty of a basic nature too. Were inner emptiness and so on not empty of a basic nature, the explanation of all dharmas as emptiness would not be well founded. 
Emptiness of a basic nature
“The emptiness of a basic nature would have been destroyed.”
If inner emptiness and so on were not also empty of a basic nature, the teaching 
“that ‘all dharmas are empty of a basic nature’ ”
would get damaged, in the sense of being destroyed. Then 
“the emptiness of a basic nature does not perish, is not immovable, and is not nonrecurring”
teaches  the emptiness that is the mark of the establishment of dharmas. This mark of the establishment of dharmas, furthermore, is taught fourfold: not perishing and so on; not increasing or decreasing and so on; not being established and not being established after having set out; and not obstructing. 
There, the first of those subsections is: it “does not perish” because it is uncompounded; it “is not immovable” because it is constituted as a nonexistent thing; and it “is not nonrecurring” because it is freedom from forms of life. Then it again teaches these same three in detail with
“it does occupy a location,”
teaching that it is in an uncompounded state because something compounded occupies a location; it
“does not stand in a place,”
because it is pervaded by a nonexistent thing; and it
“does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere,” 
because it is freedom from forms of life.
The second subsection on not increasing and so on is as before.
“All dharmas are not established”
because they are in their intrinsic nature not established, 
“and not established after having set out”
because an escape does not exist. These two teach the investigation of the two—the “established” and the “established after having set out”—in the statement about dharmas other than these two, “established in which bodhisattvas are, after setting out, established in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.”
“They do not see any dharma at all as obstructing”
as an attachment to emptiness.
“They see all dharmas as not obstructing”
means they see all dharmas are empty. Then, they 
“do not apprehend… a self,”
and so on, teaches
“the emptiness of a basic nature.”
“In that”—
in this emptiness of a basic nature. The “emptiness of a basic nature”  teaches that persons have no self, and dharmas have no self. The illustration of 
“a tathāgata’s… magically created monk or nun”
establishes those two selflessnesses. 
“Just that error is itself not error.”
Earlier, in the context of the falsely imagined, “just that” foundation “is itself error”; in the context of the thoroughly purified it is “not error.” 
“Because of having thought construction as cause”—
it has in mind a falsely imagined result. 
“They, furthermore, are not exactly like the ultimate there” 
means 
“the applications of mindfulness,”
and so on, are falsely imagined, they are not the ultimate. That emptiness of a basic nature is also called “perfection.”
“That emptiness of a basic nature, furthermore, is the emptiness of a basic nature at the prior limit,”
and so on, teaches it is emptiness at all three times. 
“Thus, it is amazing how they practice all dharmas that are the emptiness of a basic nature without complicating the emptiness of a basic nature.”
The idea is that engaging with dharmas that do not exist would complicate emptiness. So, he says
“form is not one thing and the emptiness of a basic nature another.”
Thus, it is saying “it is amazing” how when bodhisattvas engage with phenomena, they see that form and so on “is not one thing and the emptiness of a basic nature another,” that just those, form and so on, are the emptiness of a basic nature.
“Fully awaken to form itself as the knower of all aspects”—
this means fully awakening to the dharmas, form and so on, at the time of the knowledge of all aspects because there is no difference between them. 
“On the contrary, the world together with the gods, together with Māra, together with Brahmā”— 
“on the contrary,”  they do not know that form and so on are only one. It means ordinary beings 
“do not know”
as they really are that form and so on are only one, and
“on account of not knowing,”
they
“settle down on”
them and accumulate karma, grasp hold of and
“appropriate form,”
and so on, that are its maturation. On account of that they come into suffering existence caused by appropriation, and 
“are not liberated from”
suffering. 
“…the emptiness of a basic nature … [they] do not complicate form with ‘it is empty, or it is not empty.’ ”
Form does not make emptiness complicated on account of the perception of duality, because there is no duality. 
“It is because the ‘this is form,’ and ‘this is emptiness’… that might make that sort of complication have no intrinsic existence”—
no intrinsic existence that constitutes an existent thing.
“Bodhisattva great beings do not practice awakening and form within having made a division.”
“They do not practice form having made a division in awakening.”
This means they do not engage with form having made a division into the bodhisattva and the awakening in “bodhisattvas practice awakening.”
“Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings do not think, ‘I am practicing awakening and form.’ ”
They do not, making a division, engage with form, thinking, “I am practicing awakening.”
“A practice of taking anything up”— 
engaging with a causal sign. 
“Stand in the basic nature of form”—
stand in the emptiness of form.
“Moreover, … simply based on… labeled by way of ordinary convention”
teaches that ultimately even unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening does not exist.
 When they practice just those dharmas it means they practice just those, giving and so on,
“without apprehending giving, … a benefactor,”
and so on.
“Lord, how, when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom,  do they make an effort at the awakening path?” 
How, if all the awakening path does not exist, is the idea.
“[They] do not disengage from form,”
because form and so on do not exist.
“How will the perfection of wisdom… be accomplished”
given that it does not exist?
 The explanations of skillful means and of the perfection of wisdom that cannot be grasped are easy to understand.
 The question,
“Has there been or will there be a real basis of form in the way a foolish ordinary person has settled down on it?”
is a statement about the three times.
“If something that really existed was there before”—
this means that if they were to grasp all those they grasped as there before as not there later, 
“there would be the fault.”
“Lord, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ path?”
is a question about the path that comprises bringing beings to maturity and purifying a buddhafield. 
 Then the explanation of the six perfections, the explanation of the path, the explanation of the training in all dharmas, and the explanation of no location can be grasped from a close reading of the scripture.
“Lord, if all dharmas are unproduced, well then, Lord, how will bodhisattva great beings produce a path to awakening?”
This intends that the statement “they should produce the unproduced” is not logical. With,
“All dharmas have not been produced. How so? All dharmas have not been produced for those who do not occasion anything,”
it says that all dharmas have not been produced just for those abiding in nonconceptual meditative stabilization who do not occasion anything good or bad and so on, but they are indeed produced for those foolish, noncomprehending ordinary people who do occasion things. 
 With
“Lord,  whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise,”
and so on, the elder asks how, if the true nature of dharmas is at all times marked as completely unmistaken, could it be logical that it comes to possess the attribute of production for ordinary beings and does not come to do so for the learned? 
Having said that, the Lord said, “Exactly so, Subhūti,”
and so on. He is teaching that in the true nature of dharmas there is never any mistake, but, because of the fault of not comprehending, foolish ordinary people say of falsely imagined phenomena that “they are produced.” He intends to say that production is just of falsely imagined phenomena from falsely imagined phenomena. He does not intend that it is from the true nature of dharmas. 
Having said that, the elder Subhūti said,
 “Lord, do they reach awakening on that path that has been produced?”
and so on, is an inquiry about the production and nonproduction of dharmas without outflows. 
“Just awakening is the path, and just the path is awakening.”
The Lord is saying there is no difference between the path and awakening because both are divisions of the pure dharma-constituent, but still, during the earlier time period it is called “path” because it is the cause, and during the later time period it is called “awakening.” He is explaining that ultimately, because those two are not different, it is not suitable to say “they reach awakening on the path” or “they reach it without a path.”
 With
“Lord, if just awakening is the path, and just the path is awakening,”
and so on, the elder asks: if the path and awakening are not different, in that case bodhisattvas who have reached the path will have reached awakening, in which case bodhisattvas will have obtained  all the buddhadharmas included in the form body and included in the dharma body. 
Having asked that, the Lord,
who does not accept the statement that “a buddha reaches awakening,” 
asked him in return, “Subhūti, what do you think, does a buddha reach awakening?”
and so on. He is saying that what he said is not right because a buddha and awakening are not different. He is teaching that just as that statement is not right, similarly what he said about “bodhisattvas reaching awakening” is not right either. 
 Then, accepting that even though a bodhisattva and awakening are not different, still, that bodhisattvas reach awakening exists as a conventional designation, with
“Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings, having completed the six perfections,”
and so on, he teaches the steps for reaching awakening. Hence, without totally rejecting such falsely imagined steps as those, he is explaining that they will reach awakening, but not attain it immediately. 
 Then the question about how they will 
“purify a buddhafield”
and the parts to that are easy to understand.
“Lord, are bodhisattva great beings ‘destined’ or rather ‘not necessarily destined’?”
is asking whether bodhisattvas are so called when “destined,” or rather bodhisattvas are so called also when “not necessarily destined”;
“the śrāvaka group or the pratyekabuddha group”
is asking are bodhisattvas so called when destined to be śrāvakas or when destined to be pratyekabuddhas.
“He intentionally, with skillful means, appropriated whatever sort of body would be of benefit to beings.”
He took birth by obtaining control over birth, not as something unwanted, under the control of karma. 
“Through a noble action without outflows, do they… take birth in terrible forms of life or…”—
from the eighth level  all their actions are noble, without outflows.
“But they have no contact with them at all”— 
with the contact of existence, or the contact of looking, or the contact of conceptualizing.
 Subhūti asks,
“How could all dharmas be included in the perfection of wisdom?”
having found unbearable the statement that all dharmas are included because the perfection of wisdom is empty of an intrinsic nature. 
 With
“Subhūti, … all dharmas are empty of all dharmas, are they not?”
and so on, the Lord explains that it does not make sense that when the perfection of wisdom does not exist then other dharmas exist, and when dharmas other than it do not exist the perfection of wisdom exists. It therefore makes sense that they are all empty and included because they have emptiness as a defining mark.
“Lord, how do [they]… standing in the emptiness of all dharmas find and produce within themselves the perfection of clairvoyance”
is asking how, if they are empty, is it established that they find and produce within themselves the clairvoyances that bring beings to maturity?
 In order to teach that they find and produce them within themselves through the gateway of emptiness, with
the Lord said, “Subhūti, here bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom see all those world systems,”
and so on, it teaches the different clairvoyances, explains the dharmas that are 
“branches of… awakening,”
teaches the different persons, asks about freeing beings, responds, and explains that security is close by. These are easy to understand.
“Lord, will beings pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of knowing suffering or will they pass into complete nirvāṇa on account of suffering?”
This question intends that were they to pass into nirvāṇa on account of suffering and its origination and so on, all foolish, ordinary persons would also pass into nirvāṇa because they have  suffering and the origination and so on; but if they pass into nirvāṇa on account of knowing suffering and knowing its origination and so on, in that case, like śrāvakas, they will have reached the result of stream enterer and so on. 
 Then the Lord teaches that they do not pass into nirvāṇa in either way, but rather pass into nirvāṇa on account of the realization of
“the sameness”
called suchness.
“Those dharmas included in the truths or not included in the truths”—
the inner aggregates are those “included in the truths,” the external ones are “not included in the truths.”
“Subhūti, such a dharma as that, which bodhisattva great beings see, does not exist.”
All phenomena do not exist just in their thoroughly established state.
“Those bodhisattvas standing at the Gotra level do not fall onto a peak”
means there they do not entertain the craving that causes acting on the desire for the śrāvaka dharmas. 
“Even though they comprehend suffering, they do not produce any thought with suffering as its objective support”
means they only master it with the knowledge of thorough mastery in the way explained before. They do not actualize it with those sixteen mental states knowing impermanence and so on because they fear falling to the śrāvaka level after having done so. 
“Awakening is a nonexistent thing.”
“Existent things” are compounded and uncompounded, constructed and unconstructed phenomena. Because it is separated from their intrinsic nature, the inexpressible ultimately abiding awakening is called “a nonexistent thing.” 
 Then again, with
“unlettered, foolish, ordinary people,”
and so on, it teaches that the dharmas of the three realms are just falsely imagined. 
“That which is not real is just not real”
means because it is falsely imagined it is simply unreal in itself. 
“The path is a nonexistent thing, the result of stream enterer is a nonexistent thing,”
and so on, teaches there is no “listening” at all because they are in their intrinsic nature nonexistent things.
“Lord, is there some real basis called suchness and unmistaken suchness, that was or is,”
and so on, is asking: does a past, or future, or present intrinsic nature of “suchness” or intrinsic nature of “unmistaken suchness” that is a compounded phenomenon ultimately exist at all? 
 The six analogies, 
“like a dream”
and so on, are easy to understand.
“Subhūti, … what do you think, those dharmas… are like an illusion, like a dream, … are they not?”
and so on teaches the perfection of giving and so on, ending with all those dharmas spoken by
“Brahmā’s melodious voice”
are like an illusion. So, since all are like an illusion there is no fault. 
“Subhūti, it is because all these dharmas have been brought into being and are the outcome of intentions”
is teaching that the perfection of giving and so on are constituted out of virtue so they have been brought into being. Because they are preceded by an intention, they are the outcome of intention, so they are falsely imagined phenomena.
“But still, Subhūti, all those dharmas establish the path and bring about the path, even though they do not cause a result to be obtained”
is teaching that all the dharmas, the perfection of giving and so on, cause a purification of the foundation, and when they cause a purification of the foundation the continuum of the path comes into being. Those nonexistent things constituted out of what is not produced and does not stop do not cause a result to be obtained, but they are marked by an unfabricated nature—the foundation.
“The perfection of giving cannot be grasped.”
It is not appropriate to grasp it as an existent thing or as a nonexistent thing.
“Subhūti,  there is no clear realization dualistically and there is no clear realization nondualistically either.”
This is teaching: If any compounded or uncompounded existent thing were to be seen, there would be a “clear realization dualistically.” And even if it were an absolutely nonexistent thing, like a rabbit’s horns and so on, there would be a “clear realization nondualistically.” The reverse from both of those is therefore the realization of sameness called 
“clear realization.” 
“Is inexpressible”
is not something that can be expressed is not something that can be discussed, or that can be explained, so, “Subhūti, take it as an ordinary convention.”
“Is the dharma a tathāgata has fully awakened to…”
is teaching that the absolutely final transformation of the basis where conceptualization and thought construction have been eliminated remains a sameness, so a knowable state does not exist and an object that will become knowable is not seen, so what will be fully awakened to? 
“Lord, given that dharmas are the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, what is this ‘sameness of dharmas’?”
The intention is: were dharmas to exist there would also be a “sameness.”
“Subhūti, here just that is the sameness of dharmas.”
This is saying the sameness of dharmas that is the intrinsic nature of nonexistent things is the intrinsic nature of nonexistent things because even the conceptualization of it as an existent thing has also been eliminated.
“Subhūti, that sameness of dharmas is not within the range of… even tathāgatas.”
The sameness of dharmas is not within the range of anyone. Even the tathāgatas do not see an intrinsic nature of the sameness of dharmas. “The sameness of foolish ordinary people,” of all noble beings, and “of tathāgatas is the same.”
“Makes a presentation of dharmas without moving from the sameness of dharmas”— 
as an ultimate truth they do not move; but conventionally they make a presentation. 
“Lord, is that true nature of dharmas a compounded phenomenon or is it an uncompounded phenomenon?”
What does this intend? He is asking with the thought that if that true dharmic nature of these dharmas, form and so on, is an uncompounded phenomenon, then it will not be the true dharmic nature of form and so on that are compounded phenomena; and if it is a compounded phenomenon, then it, like that form and so on, will be falsely imagined, because it will be subject to production and stopping. 
The Lord said, “Subhūti, it is not a compounded phenomenon and it is not an uncompounded phenomenon either.”
He eliminates them both because both are open to criticism. 
“An uncompounded phenomenon other than a compounded phenomenon cannot be apprehended, and a compounded phenomenon other than an uncompounded phenomenon cannot be apprehended either.”
Here the impure suchness of the aggregates, constituents, sense fields and so on cannot be apprehended as something aside from the aggregates and so on, and the aggregates and so on cannot be apprehended as something other than suchness either, so it is inappropriate to say about that impure suchness that it is exactly the same as or different from them.
Thus, neither can be apprehended as other than the other. It is therefore not appropriate to say “they are both the same,” so they
“are not conjoined”;
it is not appropriate to say “they are different,” so they
“are not disjoined”;
they have no form and are without conceptualization, so they
“are formless”;
words and so on cannot explain them, so they
“cannot be pointed out”;
they do not obstruct as do objects of the senses, and grasped and grasper are nonexistent, so they
“do not obstruct”;
and both have no defining mark. They have only a single mark, therefore they
“have only one mark—that is, no mark.”
Here a compounded phenomenon is unreal so “it has no mark.” An uncompounded phenomenon, as signlessness,  cannot be grasped as a causal sign so “it has no mark.” 
“A tathāgata employs this language according to ordinary convention.”
Even though compounded phenomena are not real they are designated by ordinary conventional designations. The uncompounded is inexpressible but can be talked about conventionally. 
 Having said that, with 
“in the ultimate there is no physical volitional factor, no verbal volitional factor, and no mental volitional factor,”
it explains that those designations are not real because all three types of karma are also falsely imagined phenomena. 
“Subhūti, emptiness is not anything at all, there is nothing at all.”
Because it does not do anything at all, it is “not anything at all”; because it is the intrinsic nature of a nonexistent thing, “there is nothing at all.” 
“This is not what makes a tathāgata the bull that leads the herd.”
This is teaching that the work of a tathāgata is simply just mere representation. Were these beings to understand by themselves there would be no need for a tathāgata. 
“Lord, why is it empty?”
This means “empty through the nonexistence of what?” 
“Whatever the perception of it, it is empty of that.”
A perception that in its nature grasps a causal sign of any “compounded phenomenon” does not exist, so it is empty of it. 
“Subhūti, when someone magically creates a magical creation,”
and this magical creation 
“magically creates other magical creations”
there,
“is there any real thing there that is not empty?”
This is saying that when one magical creation magically creates another magical creation, is there any entity there that is not empty?
“Subhūti, what do you think, is it concealed…”
means has 
“ ‘this is a magical creation; this is an emptiness’ ”
been made obscure by emptiness?
 The four statements,
“some are magically created by śrāvakas,”
and so on, teach the ordinary applications of mindfulness, and so on, and the extraordinary dharmas— 
“some are magically created by afflictive emotions”
teaches sentient beings, living beings, and so on; 
“and some are magically created by actions”
teaches the aggregates, constituents, sense fields, and so on. 
“Be it a production or cessation”
means the compounded dharmas. 
“It is nirvāṇa—that which has the quality of not coaxing you into believing it is true.”
In regard to “nirvāṇa,” it is said it is “that which has the quality of not coaxing you into believing it is true” because an attribute that can deceive you, or that needs to be taken away, or that needs to weaken, or that needs to be added does not exist.
“According to what you have said, Lord, that ‘not moving from emptiness and not stained by duality either…’ ”
This is saying that since you have said “nirvāṇa does not move from emptiness,” therefore you are saying that emptiness does not move but dharmas other than it do move. Since you have said “it is not stained by duality either,” you are teaching that it is not stained by either existence or nonexistence. In regard to that, if any dharma called “nirvāṇa” exists, something else, setting aside emptiness, would exist, and by existing there would still be a stain. Therefore, having worked on that statement, you must be saying that nirvāṇa is a magical creation as well. 
 Then, with
“exactly so, Subhūti, exactly so!”
the Lord teaches that a different dharma called “nirvāṇa” that is constituted as an existent thing does not exist at all, so it too is emptiness.
“Lord, … a person who is beginning the work… how should they be advised?”
He is asking for advice to be able to comprehend such a deep intrinsic nature, emptiness.
The Lord again says that if
“a thing that really existed before”
through the power of the understanding of yogic practitioners
“becomes a thing that does not exist later”
on account of an emptiness of its intrinsic nature, in that case a person who is beginning the work would be undertaking a difficult practice. But 
“there is no existent thing”
falsely imagined as constituted by an existent thing, 
“nor a nonexistent thing” 
like a rabbit’s horns, and
“there is not something’s own existence”—
anything under its own power— 
“nor any existence from something else”—
anything through the power of cause and conditions—
“so how will there ever be”
some other dharma called “an intrinsic nature?” Therefore, there is no fault because they understand even the emptiness of an intrinsic nature is of “something’s own existence.” 
Explanation of the Maitreya Chapter: Chapter 83
 Having thus finished explaining Her Ladyship the One Hundred Thousand, I will now explain what is in the Twenty-Five Thousand.
 Then, for the sake of future living beings and for the sake of those gathered in the retinue at that time, the noble 
Maitreya asked… “Lord, how do bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom who want to train in a bodhisattva’s training train in form?”
A bodhisattva’s training is in the correct comprehension of all dharmas, so he asks, “how do bodhisattvas who want to train in a bodhisattva’s training train in form,” and so on, up to, finally, 
“the buddhadharmas.”
 Then the Lord, to teach that the training in emptiness is a bodhisattva’s training, says
“[they] should train in ‘form is a mere name,’… up to ‘buddhadharmas are a mere name’ ”—
all dharmas are simply mere names. 
“Lord, when this—namely, the designationform—is apprehended together with a basis,”
and so on, teaches the following. He asks: How could form and so on be just a name? The designation of “form,” “feeling,” and so on does not indicate simply a mere name, it indicates a basis, because the name is first given and then the aspect of the basis presents itself to the mind. He means: Were that name to be without a basis,  either it would be illogical to say “a mere name,” or else, if it is taken to exist as form and so on that is not a basis, as a name, based on what and on account of what basis would that name be referring to something? That word would not exist either. Therefore, it is illogical to say “mere name.” 
“This—namely, form—is a name plucked out of thin air… for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon.”
The Lord is saying that form and so on is not a nominal entity. If it were a nominal entity, then it would be feasible that by merely saying it even those who do not know what it is connected to would know what those bases are, as entities with their various specific attributes. But they do not know those, so words are one thing and the bases, form and so on, are something else. He means it is simply conventionally suitable that later on there are those words “for this or that basis.” Therefore, form and so on is not in its intrinsic nature a name. “Plucked out of thin air” means comes about later, in the sense of “fabricated.” As for a “basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon,” it is “compounded” because it has arisen from cause and conditions; a “causal sign” because it appears to consciousness; and a “basis” because it is in the form of a basis. A place for an appearance as a compounded dharma is called a “basis.” 
 Having said that, the noble Maitreya, unable to bear the thought of a word plucked out of thin air, asks,
“Lord, is it not the case that in the absence of the name form, there is no being aware of, realizing, or knowing the name form through a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon?”
and so on. Without the name, from seeing simply the mere basis, you do not become aware “this is form”; and without seeing the basis, just from the word being said you do not become aware of the basis. He means: There, logically, if the name for form were to come about later and is not its entity, even without the name being said those who do not know what the name is connected to will comprehend “it is form.” And even after the name has been said, since the word would be plucked out of thin air the awareness that arises would not be of the actual reality of the basis. Either way it is one of these two, so form and so on is not in its intrinsic nature a name. 
 In regard to “in the absence of the name… through that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon:” construe “in the absence” as when the word is set aside; “through that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon” it is not tenable that there is awareness that that basis “is form.”
 With,
 “So then, Maitreya, I will ask you a question,”
and so on, the Lord teaches in three parts that names are plucked out of thin air and that bases are not in their intrinsic nature names.
 He makes it known that names are plucked out of thin air in three parts: because you do not know what something is from just the basis without the name being said; because there are many names for a single basis; and because there is one name for many bases. 
 There, in reference to the first part, it says
“Maitreya, what do you think—without resorting to, without standing on, without having to stand on the designation form for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, do you think this—namely, ‘this is form’—about this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon?”
and so on. If that form is taken to be a nominal entity, why do those who are ignorant of the term, who do not know that the word form stands for the form that is the basis, not have the realization in words that “this is form” by seeing just that basis? If that name is taken to be that entity that is a basis, just as a consciousness that grasps the specific defining marks of the basis arises from properly seeing the basis, similarly it would make sense that a consciousness that knows the name would arise as well. But it does not arise, so form and so on is not the nominal entity.
 In reference to the second part it says,
“Maitreya, what do you think, do a variety of kinds of words, conventional terms, conventional labels, and designations  designate, or conventionally refer to, or label, or apply to this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon?”
and so on. Let a basis be taken to be a nominal entity. There are many names for a single basis; for example, just the one feeling is called feeling, experience, state of awareness, pleasure, suffering, and equanimity. There, if that basis is taken to be a nominal entity, whereas it would make sense that when the single basis, feeling, is spoken about with many names it would become many entities, that is not the case. Therefore, you should know that form and so on is not a name entity.
 In reference to the third part it says,
“Maitreya, what do you think—here, does someone designate… to just that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon a name for a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon different from it?”
and so on. Were that basis taken to be the nominal entity, then when a name for many bases has been said, like, for example, “aggregates, sense fields, and constituents,” then all the dharmas would become a single entity. But that is not the case. Therefore, you should know that form and so on is not a nominal entity. 
 What is being taught with,
Having said that, the noble Maitreya asked him, “In that case, Lord, would it not then be just that basis that is the causal sign of a compounded phenomenon that is apprehended as the form entity?”
This is teaching: The Lord has taught that the word labeled onto a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon is together with a basis and together with a foundation; he has not taught that it is without a basis and without a foundation. Therefore, because it is grounded in the basis that is causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, it seems that the entity that is the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon is the word. 
 Then the Lord, with
“Maitreya, what do you think, … the form entity, or is it simply merely designated?”
sorts out Maitreya’s statement, teaching: Are you saying that those who use the word form for that basis are giving voice to the entity that is its defining mark, or are they just saying a word? He thus says that they are saying a word. Therefore, it is apparent that those words are giving voice to the name of that basis, not the entity, like, for example, in common parlance the child’s name Devadatta (“God-given”) and so on. Therefore, it is teaching that form and so on is not the name entity.
Having said that, the noble Maitreya asked him, “Lord, … if form is simply just a designation, name, conventional term, label, and conventional designation,” 
and so on, is saying that it is the entities of form and so on that are bases that are apprehended. It is saying: given that the Lord has said “form is a mere name,” and “feeling is a mere name” too, in that case the name form becomes the form entity and the name feeling becomes the feeling entity.
 In order to sort that out as well,
Having asked that, the Lord asked him in return, “Maitreya, what do you think, is that form that is simply just a designation, name, conventional term, label, and conventional designation produced or stopped, or defiled or purified?”
and so on. It is understood in the world that form and so on are subject to production and stopping and are subject to defilement and purification. If the dharmas, form and so on, were taken to be name entities, there would then be no production or stopping, or defilement or purification over and above that of the name, but such does occur. Therefore, you should know that a name is not the intrinsic nature of the dharmas. 
“Lord, does form just not exist at all? Is it without any mark at all?” 
and so on. The bodhisattva is asking: What about what you have said before, Lord, that “form is a mere name,” and “feeling is a mere name?” By saying that, do you intend that a mark of form and so on does not exist in any way at all, or that form just does not exist at all?
 Having said that, the Lord, concerned about it being taken nihilistically, refutes it with,
“Maitreya, I do not say ‘form just does not exist at all without any mark at all.’ ”
 Then the bodhisattva asks about its mode of existence with, 
“How then, Lord, does form exist?”
and so on. 
 With,
“Maitreya, form exists as an ordinary term and convention,”
and so on, the Lord differentiates and teaches that it exists from the perspective of the conventional truth but does not exist from the perspective of the ultimate truth. 
 Then the noble Maitreya says, 
“Lord, the way I understand what you have said,”
and so on. He is saying: If you are saying that ultimately form and so on do not exist at all, in that case, you have gone to the extreme of the nihilists and so on. There the Lord’s intention in saying “ultimately it does not exist” is this: a basis that can be designated by a name form and so on ultimately does not exist; a basis that cannot be named, that is
“inexpressible,”
has an ultimate existence. Having said that he asks, 
“Lord, if that inexpressible element ultimately exists, then how can it be a basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon designated by the name form plucked out of thin air?”
and so on. If the ultimate element is inexpressible by the entity that is the name and word for form and so on,  how could that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon designated by the name ever have any sort of existence or nonexistence? Having asked that, Maitreya also asks,
“And if ultimately it does not exist, then how could it be an inexpressible element?”
What does this teach? It is teaching that he has asserted that very basis that is the causal sign of a compounded phenomenon is its base because there is nothing else serving as a base of the inexpressible ultimate element. If that basis that is the causal sign of a compounded phenomenon ultimately does not exist, it does not make sense to say that “the inexpressible element is based on the basis that is the causal sign of a compounded phenomenon.” He is saying that you cannot call the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon the “inexpressible element.”
 Then the Lord, wanting to teach the way in which the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon does not exist, and how, even though it does not exist, it serves as the foundation, with,
“So then, Maitreya, I will ask you a question,”
and so on, asks him about just that. With,
“Maitreya, what do you think—when abiding in the correct practice of wisdom connected with the inexpressible element,”
and so on, he goes on to say: “Maitreya, when you take up the thoroughly purified wisdom, the inexpressible element, at that point does the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon appear or does it not appear?” And the bodhisattva says,
“Lord, I do not apprehend it.”
He means it does not appear.
Then the Lord said, “From this one of many explanations, Maitreya”— 
what does this teach? It says: “Understand that since the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon does not appear when you are cultivating attention to the ultimate, it does not exist ultimately, but it exists as a convention.” That conventional reality, furthermore, cannot ultimately be expressed as just that or as other. Therefore, it says,
“You should know that  this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon is not the inexpressible element, and the inexpressible element is not other than this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon.”
 Then, to teach the flaws in the position that it is just that, it says,
“Maitreya, this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon… if they are taken to be the inexpressible element, well then, all foolish ordinary people would be in nirvāṇa.”
If the conventional reality itself is the ultimate, well then, the very basis of a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon would be the inexpressible element. In that case, by having directly witnessed the basis of a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon they would have directly witnessed the inexpressible element.
 Then, to teach the flaws in the position that it is other, it says
“Maitreya, if the inexpressible element is taken to be other than this basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, well then, given that even the causal sign would not be apprehended,”
and so on. If the ultimate is something other than conventional reality, then the inexpressible element would be “other than,” that is, broken off from the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, and if that were the case the true nature of a phenomenon would be other than the phenomenon. 
 And what would be wrong with that? 
“A realization of the inexpressible,”
the ultimate 
“element,”
would not be accomplished. How so? Given that the ultimate element is without a causal sign, in what form would that absence of a causal sign come to appear to consciousness? When that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon and the dharma-constituent are not different, it is correct that the compounded thing and the dharma-constituent then become awakening’s cause. The intention is this: they first take the element with a causal sign as the basis they apprehend, then later, when they are carrying out an analysis with wisdom, apprehend it as the ultimate constituted as a nonexistent basis. That is correct.
 Thus, the Lord teaches that a compounded basis ultimately does not exist  and also that the ultimate is released from being just that or another. Then the noble Maitreya, worried there is a mistake again, asks,
“Lord, if, when bodhisattvas are abiding in the correct practice of wisdom connected with the inexpressible element,”
and so on. When bodhisattvas cultivating attention to the inexpressible element do not apprehend a compounded basis, is that basis
“not apprehended”
because it does not exist, or is it 
“not apprehended”
because the practice of wisdom connected with the inexpressible element does not engage with the basis?
Then the Lord said, “Maitreya, that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon has no independence or existence at all.”
This teaches the following: Even though the basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon is unreal, still foolish, ordinary people lack the strength to take hold of the ultimate because, governed by the error of ignorance and the maturation of karma and so on as cause and conditions, bases that are dependent phenomena and are not independent still appear to consciousness as the opposite of how they actually are. When bodhisattvas are working hard at cultivating paying attention to that, the ignorance and so on that are the cause and conditions are not there, so the earlier appearance constituted as a phenomenon dependent on them thus does not appear. In the absence of ignorance and so on as cause, that compounded basis does not still have the strength to arise independently. Therefore, it says “that basis… has no independent existence at all.” And therefore it also says “nonexistence” is “not apprehended.”
“Maitreya, when you conceive of that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon,”
and so on, teaches when a dependent phenomenon occurs constituted by error, and true reality when the error does not occur. This means that when there is conceptualization the apprehending is in error dependent on the power of something else, the conceptualization,  and when there is no conceptualization the apprehending is without error as just the ultimate, because the dependent phenomenon does not exist. Having been asked that by the Lord, with 
“it is, Lord,”
noble Maitreya accepts it.
 Then the Lord posits it as just conceptualization, with,
“If that is so, Maitreya, … [it] is simply just conceptualization,”
and then, in order to eliminate that it is something that really exists, asks, 
“When they are thus abiding in the nonconceptual element free from conceptualizations, what existence does it… have?”
There, “they” are the bodhisattvas; “thus” when they ultimately do not exist; “abiding in the nonconceptual element”—in the ultimate element; and “what existence does it have” is what existence does that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon have? This means it is just nonexistent. 
“What existence can be apprehended?”
Were it to exist, it would be apprehended.
 Noble Maitreya, in order to again differentiate and teach all phenomena, form and so on, from the perspective of the conventional and ultimate, then asks,
“Lord, how many designations for the separate aspects of form should a bodhisattva practicing the perfection of wisdom, involved in skillfully making a differentiation of a dharma, know?”
 Then the Lord, with 
“Maitreya, … should know three… modes of form,”
and so on, gives an exposition of their divisions. From
“imaginary form, … conceptualized form, and … the true dharmic nature of form,” 
 up to 
“imaginary buddhadharmas, … conceptualized buddhadharmas, and… the true dharmic nature of buddhadharmas,”
it teaches that all ordinary and extraordinary phenomena  are included within the three aspects. 
 Then, when noble Maitreya again asks,
“What is imaginary form?”
and so on, 
the Lord said, “Maitreya, based on the designation, name, label, and conventional designation form for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, this imagining that it is the intrinsic nature of form is imaginary form,”
and so on. This means: based on a conventional designation, relative to the compounded basis that is the reason for the conventional designation, that name and term form, when designated as the intrinsic nature of form, is falsely imagined form.
 As for the nature of phenomena there are three: a falsely imagined nature, a dependent nature, and a thoroughly established nature. 
 There, for the phenomena, form and so on: the expression mode of appearance as “form” and so on is the falsely imagined nature; the mode of erroneous appearance as the dharmas to consciousness because of the power of ignorance and so on is the dependent nature; and the inexpressible, signless mode of appearance separated from those names and that mode of erroneous appearance is the ultimate, thoroughly established nature. You should grasp this in detail from the text. 
 Those three natures—here “falsely imagined form, conceptualized form, and the true dharmic nature of form”—are explained sequentially. 
 There it talks about “falsely imagined form, falsely imagined feeling, falsely imagined perception,” and so on, that are the names “form, feeling, perception” and so on. It teaches them with
“based on the designation, name, label, and conventional designation form for this or that basis that is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon,”
and so on. 
 After that  it teaches two aspects, with
“that basis which is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon, an expression dependent on conceptualization established in the true dharmic nature of mere conceptualization,”
and so on. A mind arising and appearing in the mode of an appearance of an existent thing for foolish, ordinary persons whose minds have become distorted, governed by afflictive emotions and the maturation of karma, and so on, as cause and conditions, is “conceptualized form.” “That basis which is a causal sign of a compounded phenomenon” and so on teaches that.
 “Established in the true dharmic nature of mere conceptualization”—there is no other nature except the mode of appearance when something has been conceptualized by an intellectually active state of mind, so that basis is established as a merely conceptualized nature. Just that which is established as that is called “conceptualization.” 
 Thus “dependent on,” taking as its point of departure just that “conceptualization” established as the mere mode of appearance when something has been conceptualized by an intellectually active state of mind, the thoroughly distracted mode of appearance constituted as a basis connected with an expression is called “an expression.” Thus, dependent on that mode of appearance “established as the mode of appearance when something has been conceptualized by an intellectually active state of mind,” the appearance in the form of a basis to the intellectually active state of mind is called “conceptualized form.”
 You should connect this in the same way with 
“feeling”
and so on as well.
 Then, in regard to the true dharmic nature of form, it says
“whether the tathāgatas arise or whether the tathāgatas do not arise,”
and so on. This “whether the tathāgatas arise” teaches that the true dharmic nature, not impermanence, is its intrinsic nature. In regard to “the true dharmic nature of form,” where it says 
“this eternally eternal, constantly constant absence of imaginary form as the intrinsic nature of conceptualized form,”
when just that mode of appearance in a nonconceptual intellectually active state of mind has become separated from a falsely imagined phenomenon described before—a mode of appearance suited, as the expressed and expression mode of appearance, to name and designation— then, that mode of appearance established, in itself, in an inexpressible form as an absence of conceptualization is “the true dharmic nature of form.”
“The nonexistence of an intrinsic nature,”
because the falsely imagined nature does not exist; 
“the nonexistence of a self in dharmas”—
the nonexistence of a mode of appearance that is the essential nature of a dharma;
“suchness”—
a mode of appearance without distortion; and
“the very limit of reality”—
the culmination of such a mode of appearance. You should connect this in the same way with 
“feeling”
and so on as well.
“Maitreya, view the form that is imaginary as not a material reality,”
because it is absolutely nonexistent. 
“View conceptualized form as a material reality based on the material reality of a conceptualization.”
This means it does exist because it exists conventionally. It is a material reality because as a compounded phenomenon it is destroyed and exists as form. So this is an explanation that it is existent as a conceptualized nature and is a material reality.
“But not because it is there under its own power”—
it says that because it has a dependent nature.
“The true dharmic nature of form… as neither a nonmaterial reality nor a material reality and in the category of the ultimate”—
this is the true dharmic nature of form. It is not suitable to say “it does not exist” because it exists as an inexpressible entity, so it is not “a nonmaterial reality.” It is not suitable to say “it exists” because it exists in the form of a conceptualized basis, so “nor” is it “a material reality.” This therefore teaches a middle way avoiding two extremes. “The category of the ultimate” means the nature of the ultimate. The word “category” means nature. Finally, you should connect this in the same way with them all, up to
“buddhadharmas”
as well.
 Having discussed the three marks from the perspective of the three natures, to set the scene for teaching the mark of nonduality, noble Maitreya says, 
“this that the Lord has said”
earlier, in the discussion of the brief exposition of the perfection of wisdom section, the twenty-eighth question,
“namely, ‘anything called form is counted as not two,’ ”
and so on. What does 
“Maitreya, what do you think, is the absence of material reality in imaginary form, or is it not”
teach? 
Just that nonexistence of “form or not form” in each of these three—falsely imagined form, conceptualized form, and the true dharmic nature of form—individually is the nondual, is suchness, is the absence of a self in dharmas. Thus, the words form, feeling, and so on, when enumerated as suchness, are counted as not two. That is the meaning, and wanting to teach just that, to teach the mark of each of those three aspects of form as free from form and not form, first, based on falsely imagined form, it says, “Is the absence of material reality in imaginary form, form, or is it not?” 
 It is not suitable to say falsely imagined form is the intrinsic nature of form because it does not exist as what constitutes form; but it is not suitable to say that it does not constitute form either, because it does exist relative to form’s name and what has been designated form. Therefore, it says,
“Is then form”
that—
“just the mere designation, name, label, and conventional designation form for it?”
This means form is not nonexistent based on what has been designated, but, because the intrinsic nature of form does not exist, it is not form either, so “it is not two.” 
“Maitreya, what do you think, is conceptualized form, the material reality… not form?”
The conceptualized form that is that appears as constituting form, so the intrinsic nature of form is not nonexistent; but  it is also ultimately not the intrinsic nature of form because it is an intrinsic nature separated from the perception of form. Therefore, it says
“is that imaginary form of just that conceptualized form—that which is not its intrinsic nature, not its defining mark—form?”
Thus, this means that form is not nonexistent because that conceptualized form appears as the intrinsic nature of form suitable to be named form, but it is also not form because ultimately it does not have the defining mark of form, so “it is not two.” 
“Is that true dharmic nature of form, form in the category of selflessness, form?”
Form that is the thoroughly established true nature of dharmas is not the intrinsic nature of form because it is an intrinsic nature separated from all causal signs; but it is not not the intrinsic nature of form either because it is the intrinsic nature of form—the true nature of dharmas. Therefore, it says, 
“Is that true dharmic nature of form that is just that true dharmic nature of form, not form?”
It is not form because the true nature of dharmas is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature, but it is not not form because it is the true dharmic nature of form. That is the meaning of nondual. Therefore, it is
“counted as nondual”
in the sense of “counted as suchness.” 
Similarly, connect this with them all, up to the buddhadharmas
“are nondual.”
 Having taught in this way that form is—up to, finally, the buddhadharmas are—nondual, then to teach in another way that the four truths are marked by nonduality, it says
“[they] neither comprehend nor do not comprehend form, and just that is their comprehension.”
Bodhisattvas paying attention to the mark of all dharmas in meditative equipoise do not comprehend. While not in meditative equipoise like śrāvakas,  with the knowledge of mastery they comprehend, just as it has been explained before. Therefore just that not comprehending absolutely like that is their comprehension. Similarly, also connect this with
“abandon… actualize… and cultivate.”
 Then, to teach what they become skilled in when such skill in the mark of nonduality arises, it teaches nirvāṇa with,
“Maitreya, the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas is deep, extremely deep.”
Having asked 
“why is [it]… deep?”
it explains,
“It is because the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas is neither nirvāṇa nor not nirvāṇa; that is why it is called ‘deep, extremely deep.’ ”
Take “the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas” as the extremely pure transformation of the basis. That transformation of the basis, furthermore, is in the intrinsic nature of a complete nirvāṇa beyond all afflictive obscuration and obscuration to knowledge, the intrinsic nature of a complete nirvāṇa beyond the maturation of karma. Therefore, it is nirvāṇa. Thus, unlike śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas they work for the welfare of beings for as long as saṃsāra exists. Therefore, it is not nirvāṇa. 
 Then Maitreya says,
“Lord, if, taking the welfare of others as the point of departure, bodhisattvas do not totally reject saṃsāra… how do they not totally reject nirvāṇa?”
He is asking: if for as long as saṃsāra exists bodhisattvas working for welfare of others do not constantly and always reject saṃsāra, how in that case will [a bodhisattva’s nirvāṇa] be nirvāṇa? 
 Then,
The Lord said, “Maitreya, taking the welfare of others as the point of departure, it is not nirvāṇa because they do not totally reject saṃsāra; taking their own welfare as the point of departure, it is not not nirvāṇa because they do not totally reject nirvāṇa.” 
“Taking the welfare of others as the point of departure, there is not a total rejection of saṃsāra and appropriation of a nirvāṇa without aggregates, therefore it is not a nirvāṇa; but taking their own welfare as the point of departure, because the work has been done, there is not a total rejection of nirvāṇa and there is no appropriation of a life in saṃsāra, therefore it is a nirvāṇa. What is the Lord teaching with this? He is explaining that it is nirvāṇa when they take the dharma body as the point of departure, but from the perspective of the complete enjoyment body and magically created body it is not nirvāṇa.
“Lord, if, taking the welfare of others as the point of departure, bodhisattvas do not totally reject saṃsāra, by not totally rejecting saṃsāra how do they not totally reject nirvāṇa?”
With this teaching it is asking: If for the sake of others they do not totally reject saṃsāra, they will have totally rejected nirvāṇa. If for their own sake they do not totally reject nirvāṇa, they will have totally rejected saṃsāra. Therefore, given that these “not totally rejecting and rejecting saṃsāra,” and “passing into nirvāṇa and not passing into nirvāṇa,” are contradictory, how is it not a contradiction? 
 Then the Lord, with
“[they] do not even conceive of saṃsāra as actually saṃsāra,”
and so on, teaches that they are not contradictory. This means bodhisattvas do not conceive of all dharmas. Seeing them all as just the same, they do not entertain in their mind in regard to saṃsāra the construct “it is saṃsāra,” nor in regard to nirvāṇa the construct “it is nirvāṇa.” Thus, they stay in the same state, and while remaining in that same state do not, for instance, recoil mentally from anything because of seeing a defect or get attracted to anything because of seeing an advantage. 
 Then the noble Maitreya, still unhappy with that, asked,
“Well then, Lord, will it not be the case that just as bodhisattvas standing in the realm without thought construction… have not totally rejected a life in saṃsāra they will similarly not have appropriated it, and just as they have not totally rejected nirvāṇa they will similarly not have appropriated that, either? And Lord, if there is no appropriation, how can there be no rejection?”
“Bodhisattvas do not conceive of saṃsāra or nirvāṇa, apprehending them as being the same. There is therefore no rejection of saṃsāra or nirvāṇa and there is no appropriation of them either.” So he asks about that: if there is no appropriating there, how is there no rejection?
“Maitreya, I  do not say they ‘appropriate’ or ‘do not appropriate’ a life in saṃsāra.”
This says: I do not say they appropriate or forsake based on abandoning or not abandoning a life in saṃsāra; I say it, contingent on the need for it, based on the work being done, because, through the force of the clairvoyances, they do not make an absolute break in the stream of work for the welfare of the mass of beings at all times in infinite world systems. Therefore, I say “they do not totally reject saṃsāra,” but not because they do not abandon saṃsāra. 
 Thus, taking the realm of
“emptiness, the realm that gives no basis for apprehending anything”
as the point of departure, he has taught that they remain in that, and therefore says, “They appropriate nirvāṇa.”
“Lord, how in the absence of conceptualization should the collection of marks be viewed?”
is asking how is the absence of conceptualization completed and finalized. 
“The nonduality… of an existent thing and a nonexistent thing” 
is the absence of the duality of “existing” and “not existing.” 
“Nonelaboration”
is not conceptualizing those dharmas as anything at all in any way at all.
“Lord, are all śrāvakas absolutely with certainty located in nirvāṇa?”
He asks this intending: since bodhisattvas have been found not to appropriate a life in saṃsāra, are śrāvakas, who are without appropriation, absolutely in a state of nirvāṇa?
“Many families and dispositions of beings can be found.”
There are “many families and dispositions of beings,” which is to say, there are three “families.” Also “dispositions” differ on account of particular aspirations, proclivities, beliefs, faculties, and so on. 
“Strive for a superior qualification, who gain just the superior qualification”—
because of their disposition, from the start, they want perfect, complete awakening and, in accord with what they want, “gain” it.
“Inferior”—
śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha awakening.
“Understand that it is lacking, are not satisfied just by that”
means that they become noble beings and, having gained the state of a śrāvaka, later become buddhas. 
“…does not take rebirth, so how do they reach it?”
This intends that when there is rebirth in saṃsāra the accumulations for awakening can be completed. 
“The Lord has not said… is their rebirth.”
stream enterers do not arise in an eighth existence here; once-returners appropriate a single existence here; non-returners do not appropriate even a single existence here; and worthy ones do not appropriate any existence at all, so rebirth has ceased. 
“Maitreya, I do not say that their rebirth is dictated by karma and afflictive emotion; I say that theirs is an inconceivable rebirth, magically created and dedicated.”
In this, take the “rebirth dictated by karma and afflictive emotion” with the stream enterers and so on. 
 Those who have the three births have nothing to do with that. They have a threefold birth—“an inconceivable birth, magically created birth, and birth through a prayer that is a vow.”
 There, if those not necessarily destined to be in the śrāvaka family have come into the presence of a tathāgata, at that time the tathāgata,  seeing the particular features of their family, will explain to them the doctrine in the sort of way that produces a desire for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Having connected them with that sort of path, if they do not forsake that desire, having actualized the very limit of reality they gain the result of stream enterer and so on. Thus, the buddhas with skillful means and with the system of the perfection of wisdom establish them on the path to all-knowledge. Whether they have become those in training or not in training, because they have not given up wanting unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, even though they actualize nirvāṇa they do not generate an absolutely intense admiration for it as do those who are certain to be śrāvakas. To illustrate, some, when viewing a town or village, think “I am going to live right there.” Then, their admiration for it turns into an admiration for something else when they have seen it, and they think, “I am going to go elsewhere.” They have a change of mind when they have seen it. Similarly, here too when there is a desire for unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, the desire for nirvāṇa turns into something else and they become different from those who are certain to be śrāvakas. Therefore some, even though they have abandoned the afflictions, become special because of the power of residual impressions and so on, and because of the power of a compassionate aspiration and so on they do not get extremely repulsed by saṃsāra. They want to work for the benefit of beings like someone who sees their young son fallen into a filthy cesspool, sees that the cesspool is filthy, but still does not get repulsed because of wanting to get him out. Those like that, in training or not in training, under the guidance of a tathāgata dedicate the wholesome roots of the extraordinary noble path without outflows and so on like this—they dedicate them with the thought: “In order to be of benefit to beings may all of my extraordinary wholesome roots without outflows be directed toward birth in saṃsāra.” through the power of such a dedication the uncontaminated good of the path and so on causes them to be born in saṃsāra. They have  wholesome dharmas similar to afflictions that function as a cooperative condition. Thus, as the other sūtras say:
 “Sāgaramati, what are these afflictions accompanying the wholesome roots that keep saṃsāra going? They are dissatisfaction with their accumulation of merit, taking up birth in existence having the intention to do so, fixation on meeting with buddhas, not getting depressed when bringing beings to maturity, trying to grasp the good Dharma, making an effort at whatever work beings do, nonseparation from thoughts of attachment to the Dharma, and not giving up the practice of the perfections. Sāgaramati, those are the afflictions accompanying the wholesome roots that keep saṃsāra going. Bodhisattvas are in close contact with them, but they are not stained by the faults of the afflictions.”
[Sāgaramati] asked, “Lord, if they are wholesome roots why are they called ‘afflictions’?”The Lord said: “Sāgaramati, it is because through these sorts of afflictions bodhisattvas are in close contact with the three realms and the three realms come about from afflictions. Bodhisattvas are in close contact with the three realms at will through the power of their skillful means and their production of wholesome roots. That is why they are called ‘afflictions accompanying wholesome roots.’ They are afflictions to the extent that they connect them to the three realms, but not because they afflict their minds.”
Therefore, it is said that “through the force of such a dedication, because of the wholesome roots without outflows they are born in saṃsāra.”
 Certain non-returners or worthy ones endowed with a special clairvoyance generated through the force of meditative stabilization demonstrate birth in various magical creations, work for the infinite welfare of beings, and complete the equipment for awakening. That is called magically created birth.
 For others, through the force of relying on spiritual friends,  the special features of such prayers that are vows have come together from the start and they accomplish dedicated births that have the fruition of those prayers of theirs as their nature. That is called dedicated birth.
 Why, though, without reaching the result of stream enterer and so on, do they not complete the equipment for awakening? It is because they are powerless to do so because their afflictions are more intense and their faculties duller. Without the necessary purification of faculties and abandonment of afflictions they are incapable of completing the equipment for awakening. Therefore, with skillful means a tathāgata causes them to become endowed with that sort of supreme force. As the other sūtras say:
 “Lord, how should we view the Tathāgata’s prophesy of śrāvakas to unsurpassed, perfect awakening?”The Lord: “The prophesy of śrāvakas to unsurpassed, perfect awakening is a prophesy that has in view their lineage.”
“Lord, if even śrāvakas without outflows who have cut the fetters to suffering existence are in the lineage, how will they awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”
The Lord: “I will teach an analogy for that. Listen! Child of good family, a king who receives the royal consecration on the crown of his head has a son. He studies all the sciences but has dull faculties, not sharp faculties, so he studies what you study later earlier, and studies later what you study earlier. So, child of good family, what do you think, is that boy, on account of that, not the son of the king?”“Not so, Lord, not so, Sugata. You still say of him that he is the king’s son.”
The Lord: “In the same way, child of good family, bodhisattvas  with dull faculties who are in the lineage, earlier will put an end to afflictions on the path of meditation, and later will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. What do you think, child of good family, on account of that will they not have fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?”“Not so, Lord; not so, Sugata.”
Therefore, reborn through the power of these three sorts of birth they complete the equipment for awakening.
“The Long Explanation of the Noble Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand, Twenty-Five Thousand, and Eighteen Thousand Lines” is completed.
Revised and finalized by the Indian preceptor Surendrabodhi and the chief editor-translator monk Yeshé Dé.