{{translation:{id:UT22084-072-038,key:toh338,version:1.0.11,style:plain}}}
The Exposition of Karma
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavān was staying in Śrāvastī in Prince Jeta’s grove, the park donated by Anāthapiṇḍada.
There the Bhagavān addressed the brahmin youth Śuka thus: “Son, I will teach you The Exposition of Karma. Listen carefully and remember it well, and I will teach!” 
“Please do so, Bhagavān!” 
The brahmin youth Śuka having thus assented, the Bhagavān said to him, “Son, I say that beings are owners of their own actions, they originate from their actions, they are heirs of their actions, and they take action as their refuge. In this way, son, beings are divided into high, middle, and low in terms of their actions. 
“In this regard, there are, for instance, the actions that lead to a short life.
“What kind of action leads to a short life? Killing, rejoicing in killing, celebrating killing, instigating the death of an enemy, praising the death of an enemy, causing death in the womb, praising the causing of death in the womb, and preparing the sacrificial ground where buffalo, cows, pigs, birds, and so on are to be killed. The children and grandchildren of the originator of this sacrifice, as well as other people hoping for a positive result or acting out of fear, will kill many beings as they continue to carry out this initial sacrifice.
“For example, in a certain city in Kāśmīr, a certain mendicant who was an arhat was sitting at the door of a house. On a road leading straight to this house, a miserably mooing cow was being led along on a lead. The mendicant, having seen the cow, exclaimed, ‘Alas! What a misery!’ 
“The people then asked the mendicant, ‘Ācārya, why did you say, “Alas! What a misery”?’ 
“He replied, ‘Although I usually do not speak to those without faith, in this particular case I will speak.’ Then he said, ‘That cow being led along there, mooing, was in a former existence a rich merchant. He had prepared a piece of land for the yearly sacrifice and killed a great many cows there. When the time of his death drew near, he called his sons and said to them, “Sons, if you love me, you will also execute this yearly cattle sacrifice after I am dead!” So instructed, the sons agreed and said, “We will.” Then this man died and,  because he had killed out of confusion, was reborn as a cow in his own house. After having been reborn there again and again, and having been killed time and again, this is now the sixth time he is being led to the sacrificial ground.’ 
“The mendicant then said to the cow with pity, ‘You yourself have prepared this very sacrificial ground. You yourself have performed this very sacrifice and killed many cows.  Your mooing is to no avail! What is it good for?’ So it was said.
“Seeing the preparation of a sacrificial ground such as this is like witnessing a battle during which many beings such as humans and horses are killed, or like being thrilled about the accoutrements of war.
“As the Buddha has said in the Kālikasūtra:
“ ‘Ānanda, resorting to killing and having grown accustomed to it and practiced it often becomes the cause for rebirth in the hells, in the animal realm, or as a ghost.’
“When killing is done few times and on a small scale, it leads to having a short lifespan.
“What kind of action leads to a long life? Abstaining from killing; speaking praise of abstaining from killing and encouraging others to do so; freeing people and cattle, pigs, birds, and so forth that are to be killed; giving protection to those stricken with fear; arousing thoughts of kindness toward those who are without protection; arousing thoughts of love toward those who are sick, children, and the elderly; giving food to and arousing thoughts of love toward those who are in need; and rejecting all those things referred to above concerning war and so forth, and instead practicing virtue  such as renovating and restoring stūpas and monasteries that have fallen into disrepair. 
“It is said in that same sūtra: 
“ ‘For he who restores what has fallen into ruin,Untimely death will not occur.’
“This kind of action leads to a long life. 
“What kind of action leads to having many illnesses? Anger and hitting someone with the fist or the palm of the hand; enjoying hitting somebody with the fist or the palm of the hand; speaking praise of the merit of hitting someone with the fist or the palm of the hand and encouraging it; causing one’s parents mental or physical distress; causing monks  who possess moral discipline mental distress; feeling glad when one’s enemies are stricken by illness; feeling unhappy when one’s enemies recover from an illness; and not giving medicine and giving indigestible foods—this kind of action leads to having many illnesses. 
“What kind of action leads to having few illnesses? Not hitting someone with the palm of the hand or with the fist; encouraging others to abstain from hitting with the palm of the hand or the fist and praising the merits of abstaining from hitting; rejoicing in not hitting; serving one’s ill parents, householders, and monks, regardless of whether they are senior or junior monks; caring for the sick; not feeling happy or glad when one’s enemies fall ill; rejoicing in their recovery; and giving medicine and digestible food—this kind of action leads to having few illnesses. 
“What kind of action leads to having an ugly appearance? Anger, enmity, resentment, spite, speaking ill of one’s parents, speaking ill of householders and of senior or junior monks, soiling stūpas and monasteries and the site of a stūpa, extinguishing offering lamps at stūpas and images, deriding ugly people, and having little sense of cleanliness—this kind of action leads to ugliness. 
“What kind of action leads to beauty? The opposites of anger, enmity, resentment, and spite; donating clothing; plastering stūpas and monasteries with white lime; donating beautiful bowls; making an offering of incense, scented ointment, cloth, and ornaments; praising one’s parents; praising noble ones and those who possess moral discipline; cleaning and sweeping the court around a stūpa, a monastery, and one’s house; not deriding ugly people; not deriding others in general,  whether old or young; and being very cleanly—this kind of action leads to beauty. 
“What kind of action leads to having little power? Avarice; envy; being unhappy about others’ successes; being unhappy when others are praised; despising one’s parents; despising noble ones and those who possess moral discipline; despising the sick, the old, and the young; praising what is vile, what is lacking Dharma, and the roots of nonvirtue; and turning away from the mind of awakening—this kind of action leads to having little power. 
“What kind of action leads to being powerful? Not being avaricious; not being envious; rejoicing in others’ successes; not rejoicing in others’ failures; rejoicing in hearing about others’ glory, renown, and good reputation; being happy when others are praised; building stūpas and monasteries in commemoration of the Bhagavān; turning away from what is vile, from what is lacking Dharma, and from the roots of demerit; encouraging others to engage in the roots of merit that lead to distinction; aspiring to reach awakening; and aspiring to attain distinction through the dedication of all roots of merit—this kind of action leads to being powerful.
“What kind of action leads to being born into a low social status? Vanity; conceit; not honoring one’s father and mother, śramaṇas, and brāhmaṇas; not respecting the head of a family; not attending to one’s parents; not attending to noble ones, to those who possess moral discipline, and to others occupying a position of authority, such as one’s preceptor and one’s teacher; and despising people of low class—this kind of action leads to being born into a low social status. 
“What kind of action leads to being born into a family of high social status? Having little vanity; having no conceit; honoring one’s father and mother, śramaṇas,  and brāhmaṇas; honoring the head of the family; attending to one’s parents; attending to noble ones, to those who possess moral discipline, and to others occupying a position of authority, such one’s preceptor and teacher; and not despising people of low class.
“For example, the Buddha has said in a sūtra:
“ ‘Monks, you should know that a community that is approached by monks who possess moral discipline, are celibate, and possess the quality of virtue can expect five benefits.  What are the five? It develops faith in the ones possessing moral discipline who have approached them. Furthermore, monks, at that time, that community enters the path leading to rebirth in heaven. And what is more, monks, the moment the community greets and welcomes those approaching who possess moral discipline, the community has already entered the path leading to rebirth in heaven.’
“This kind of action leads to being reborn in a family of high social status. 
“What kind of action leads to poverty? Stealing; encouraging others to commit theft; speaking praise of stealing; taking pleasure in stealing and in having stolen; depriving one’s parents of their livelihood; depriving noble ones and those who possess moral discipline of their livelihood and stealing the livelihood of monks, children, the elderly, the poor, and the sick; rejoicing when others fail to gain wealth; preventing others from gaining wealth; and rejoicing in a bad harvest—this kind of action leads to poverty. 
“What kind of action leads to wealth? Abstaining from stealing; rejoicing when someone abstains from taking what was not freely given to them by others; providing one’s parents with a livelihood; providing noble ones and those who possess moral discipline  with a livelihood; offering sustenance to the sick, children, the elderly, the poor, and others; rejoicing in the gain of others; and rejoicing in a good harvest. 
“In the same sūtra it is said: 
“ ‘What is more, monks, when the merit-collecting communities make offerings to those approaching them who possesses moral discipline  they enter the path leading to prosperity.’
“This kind of action leads to great wealth. 
“What kind of action leads to low intelligence? Here, one does not ask the learned śramaṇas or brāhmaṇas or others, ‘What is the Dharma? What is not the Dharma? What, when done by me, is conducive to happiness?’ One associates with people who lack intelligence and abandons wise people. One teaches what is not the true Dharma, and even though one knows that a reciter of the Buddhist scriptures has spoken well, due to one’s being opinionated one does not say ‘well done!’ But when a reciter has spoken what does not correspond with the Dharma, one says ‘well done!’ One praises wrong views and criticizes right views. One denigrates writers and reciters of manuscripts and deprives them of their livelihood. This kind of action leads to low intelligence. 
“What kind of action leads to great intelligence? Here, one has a disposition that dares to inquire and asks the learned śramaṇas and brāhmaṇas questions; one completely shuns those lacking wisdom; one extols the true Dharma and elucidates it; one criticizes what is not the true Dharma; and one praises the confidence of the Dharma reciters and says ‘well done!’ One acclaims those who speak coherently and steers clear of those who speak what is unacceptable; one praises right view and criticizes wrong view; one makes offerings of paper, ink, and reed pens; and, as explained in the Nandikasūtra, one does not drink alcohol.  The thirty-five faults of drinking alcohol that are taught in that sūtra will be discussed later in the section on the nonvirtuous actions. This kind of action  leads to great intelligence. 
“What kind of action leads to rebirth as a hell being? Carrying out gravely negative actions of body, speech, and mind with intensely angry thoughts; entertaining the wrong view of annihilation, the wrong view of eternalism, and the wrong view of nihilism; speaking with hostility; ingratitude; performing the evil actions that bring immediate retribution; and flinging false accusations at noble ones and those who possess moral discipline—this kind of action leads to rebirth in the hell realms. 
“What kind of action leads to rebirth in the animal realm? Carrying out moderately bad actions with body, speech, and mind and the varied actions stemming from desire, hatred, and confusion; presenting improper gifts to one’s parents or Buddhist monks; ridiculing beings who are reborn in the animal realm; and making the aspiration to be reborn there as, for example, when someone practices the ox vow or the dog vow, thinking, ‘May I be reborn like that!’
“As an example, one may here relate the Heroic Past Deeds of the Bodhisattva from the Siṃhajātaka, or the story of the brahmin Varṣākāra’s rebirth as a monkey.
“The brahmin Varṣākāra saw the sthavira Mahākāśyapa on Vulture Peak, flying in the sky above the city of Rājagṛha. Because of his close association with Devadatta and Prince Ajātaśatru, he harbored hostile thoughts in his mind and made this insulting comment: ‘This monk flies through the air from mountain peak to mountain peak just as a monkey swings from tree to tree.’ 
“When the brahmin Varṣākāra, his mind filled with hatred, had made this insulting comment, the Buddha was asked, ‘Venerable Bhagavān, what will be the karmic result of this?’ 
“The Bhagavān replied, ‘By the karmic ripening of these abusive words, the brahmin Varṣākāra will be reborn as a monkey during five hundred future lives.’
“Varṣākāra then became frightened and developed faith in the Buddha. He asked the Bhagavān at the time of his parinirvāṇa, ‘Where will this deed become exhausted?’
“The Bhagavān said, ‘During these five hundred lives you will be reborn in Rājagṛha in the Jambu continent, the Rose-Apple continent, which derives its name from the fruits called jambu that are the size of large earthen pots and delicious like the pure honey of bees. From there, leaving this incarnation, you will reach heaven.’
“To give another example, having been reborn among lions by virtue of a thought of hatred, the Bhagavān spoke the following stanza in reference to this topic:
“ ‘Long is the night for the one who lies awake; Long is a yojana for the one who is exhausted. Saṃsāra is long for the foolish,Even if they are acquainted with the holy Dharma.’
“This kind of action leads to rebirth in the animal realm.
“What kind of action leads to rebirth in the realm of ghosts? Here, someone adopts a negative course of conduct of body, speech, and mind with a mind full of anger and hatred or craving; pursues a wrong way of making a living due to improper desire; dies while being angry, hungry, or thirsty; or dies while having thoughts of attachment to material things.
“An illustration [818] from the Śatavarga-āgama Karmavibhaṅga­sūtra:
“ ‘The Bhagavān said to Ānanda, “Ānanda, either an action done by a person in a previous lifetime resurfaces and becomes present, or it becomes the force that leads to wrong views at the time of death.” ’
“This kind of action leads to rebirth in the realm of ghosts. 
“What kind of action leads to rebirth in the realm of the asuras? Someone’s committing only small or minor misdeeds with body, speech, and mind;  pride; arrogance; the pride of identification with a self; the pride of inferiority; dedicating the roots of virtue of one’s positive actions to rebirth in the world of the asuras; and following an immoral course of conduct yet in an intelligent manner that springs from refined desire—this kind of action leads to rebirth in the realm of the asuras. 
“What kind of action leads to rebirth as a human? Here, one cultivates the ten virtuous courses of action. What are the ten? One abandons the ten nonvirtuous actions: the three physical actions of killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct; the four verbal actions of lying, slander, harsh speech, and idle talk; and, furthermore, the three mental actions of covetousness, malice, and wrong views. This kind of action leads to rebirth as a human.
“What kind of action leads to rebirth as a deva belonging to the realm of sensuous desire? Here, someone practices well, and brings to perfection, the ten virtuous courses of action—this kind of action leads to rebirth as a deva belonging to the realm of sensuous desire. 
“What kind of action leads to rebirth as a deva belonging to the realm of form? Someone practices well the ten virtuous courses of action,  accomplishes them, and brings them to perfection to an especially superior degree—this kind of action leads to rebirth as a deva belonging to the realm of form. 
“What kind of action leads to rebirth as a deva belonging to the formless realm? One enters the four attainments of the formless states and, having entirely and completely transcended all notions of form, and the notion of materiality having vanished, through disengaging the mind from the notion of distinctness, thinking, ‘Space is infinite,’ one has perfected the sphere of infinity of space and abides in it. Having entirely and completely transcended the sphere of infinity of space,  thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite,’ one has perfected the sphere of infinity of consciousness and abides in it. Having entirely and completely transcended the sphere of infinity of consciousness, thinking, ‘Nothing at all exists,’ one has perfected the sphere of nothingness and abides in it. Having entirely and completely transcended the sphere of nothingness, one has perfected the sphere of neither perception nor nonperception and abides in it. This kind of action leads to rebirth as a deva belonging to the formless realm. 
“What kind of action is performed but not accumulated? Having carried out an action, one feels shame, remorse, and deprecation, and one confesses and openly admits one’s faults; one parts with it and vows not to do it again in the future. This kind of action is performed but not accumulated. 
“What kind of action is accumulated but not carried out? An action that is to be completed with the body  and concerning which one says with a defiled mind, ‘I will do this,’ but then does not actually follow through—this kind of action is accumulated but not carried out. 
“What kind of action is both carried out and accumulated? Having carried out an action, one does not feel shame; one does not remedy it, regret it, deprecate it, confess it, admit it, renounce it, or give it up; and one does not vow to not do it again in the future—action like this is both carried out and accumulated. 
“What kind of action is neither carried out nor accumulated? An action that one has intentionally carried out or made someone else carry out in a dream—action like this is neither carried out nor accumulated. 
“What kind of action leads to being reborn in hell and passing away from there only after having completely exhausted the lifespan of the hell? In this regard, one has carried out actions that lead to rebirth as a hell being, and these actions are accumulated,  but having carried out these actions, one feels neither shame nor remorse, and one neither deprecates nor confesses and admits the actions done. One does not vow not to do them again in the future but instead rejoices and is satisfied like, for instance, Devadatta, Kokālika, and so forth. Action like this leads to being reborn in hell and passing away from there only after having completely exhausted the lifespan of the hell. 
“What kind of action leads to being reborn in hell and passing away from there after only half the lifespan of the hell is exhausted? In this regard, someone has carried out actions that lead to becoming a hell being but feels shame and remorse and deprecates, confesses, admits, rejects, and gives up those actions and vows not to do them again in the future. In this way does this kind of action  lead to being reborn in hell and passing away from there after only half the lifespan of the hell is exhausted.
“What kind of action leads to passing away from hell immediately upon being born there? In this regard, one has carried out actions that lead to rebirth as a hell being, and these actions are accumulated; but, having done these actions, one feels shame, remorse, and deprecation, confesses and admits those actions, and gives them up. By making the promise, ‘From now on I will not do it again!’ one will pass away from that state immediately upon being reborn there.
“For example, when King Ajātaśatru heard that he would go to the Avīci hell for carrying out the evil actions that bring immediate retribution—namely, murdering his father, splitting the monastic saṅgha, releasing the wild elephant Dhanapāla, and hurling a boulder onto the Tathāgata to kill him—he became distraught and developed faith in the Bhagavān. He confessed his sins and, as is related in the Śrāmaṇyaphala­sūtra, restored his roots of virtue. When he was about to die, he prayed, ‘From the core of my being I take refuge in the Buddha. I have carried out intolerable actions, for which I feel remorse and which I confess; by promising not to do such actions ever again, they will diminish and eventually be completely erased.’  Then he went silent.
“This kind of action leads to passing away from hell immediately upon being born there. 
“What kind of action leads to a predetermined rebirth? As for that, a person carries out an action, and, by dedicating the action in a certain way—‘May I be reborn as such a one!’—that person will be reborn as that one. For example, in the Śyāmākajātaka, the Bhagavān relates accordingly how one is reborn through the power of a strong aspiration. This kind of action  leads to a predetermined rebirth. 
“What kind of action leads to an unpredetermined rebirth? As for that, a person carries out an action but does not dedicate it by specifying ‘May I be reborn as such and such!’ This kind of action leads to an unpredetermined rebirth. 
“What kind of action leads to the ripening of a karmic result in a foreign country? In this regard, there will be ripening of a pleasant or painful karmic result in a foreign country either in this very life or in the next.
“For example, the Bhagavān has told the following story: 
“ ‘Monks, once upon a time, when the lifespan of humans of the Jambu continent was indefinite, like that of the king Māndhātar, there lived in a certain city a sea merchant’s son named Maitrāyajña. Surrounded by five hundred friends, he went to an orchard, where his friends said to him, “In this city, merchants like your father were sailors traveling to foreign lands like, for instance, the Golden Island to see other continents and accumulate riches. We, yourself included, should set sail and accumulate riches, too.” 
“ ‘Maitrāyajña replied, “So be it!” and when darkness fell, he went home to his mother and said, “Mother, I will go to the Golden Island.” 
“ ‘His mother replied, “Son, there is already such immeasurable wealth in this house. Don’t go!” 
“ ‘Maitrāyajña, after hearing his mother’s words, which persuaded him not to go, immediately went back to the orchard. The friends said, “In this matter, you need to entreat your mother even more.”
“ ‘Having heard their words, he said, “So be it!” and again went to his mother to ask. But she clasped his feet, and so, again, he stayed. Immediately upon having asked her for a third time, he went back to the orchard. 
“ ‘His friends said to him, “This is impossible! We must go!” And Maitrāyajña went once again to his mother and said, “I will go to a foreign land!” The mother then gathered all their possessions, clasped one of his feet, and made him stay once again. 
“ ‘Therefore, once more the boy went to the orchard, and his friends said, “It is your fault that we, too, still have not left. We will now leave on the thirteenth day!”
“ ‘Then Maitrāyajña, without his mother’s knowledge, drew out their abundant merchandise and put it on the street. His mother, standing in the doorway, clasped his feet again and said, “Son, don’t go!” but Maitrāyajña, in his anger, stepped on his mother’s head, left, and went to the shore of the sea. 
“ ‘There he instructed his friends, “When we are going to set sail, it is uncertain whether we will live or die. Therefore, we should all maintain the eight precepts!” And they, heeding Maitrāyajña’s words, promised to maintain the precepts. 
“ ‘Thus, they set sail, and when they had gone far into the center of the ocean, they were caught by a mighty storm, and their ship capsized. All the others died, but Maitrāyajña had seized a large copper vessel whose mouth could be closed with a piece of fabric, and eventually he reached the end of the ocean. He then continued to wander until he came to a city with a golden city wall and an orchard and a lotus pond that was pervaded by a pleasant fragrance. He saw flower petals scattered everywhere and many wreaths made from silk ribbons that had been put up as ornaments. From inside this city, four goddesses appeared and, taking him by the hand, led him inside. Then, after he amused himself with them for many years, many hundreds of years, many thousands of years, and many hundreds of thousands of years, the goddesses ordered him,  “Son of noble family, since you are a stranger in this land, you should not go outside.  However, if you happen to leave sometime, head north!”
“ ‘On another occasion, Maitrāyajña left the city and continued wandering until he arrived at a city with a silver city wall and an orchard and a lotus pond that was pervaded by a pleasant fragrance. He saw flower petals scattered everywhere and many wreaths made from silk ribbons that had been put up as ornaments. From inside the city, eight goddesses appeared. Like before, after he had amused himself with them, at some other time he left. 
“ ‘After wandering and wandering, he arrived at a city with a lapis lazuli city wall. Just as before, he saw flower petals scattered everywhere and many wreaths made from silk ribbons hung up as ornaments. From inside the city, sixteen goddesses appeared, and they, too, took him by the hand and led him inside, and with them, too, he amused himself for many hundreds of thousands of years. 
“ ‘At a later time he left, and after wandering and wandering, he arrived at a city with a rock-crystal city wall, and he saw everything like before—from the scattered flower petals to the wreaths made from silk ribbons. From inside this city, thirty-two goddesses appeared, and they, too, took him by the hand and led him inside. As before, after he had amused himself with them, they ordered him, “Son of noble family, since you are a stranger in this land, you should not leave this city. However, if you have to go, head north!”
“ ‘Immediately afterward, he left the house, faced north, and walked and walked. Eventually, he came to a thicket of thorns and saw a city with a black iron city wall. He approached, and as soon as he stepped inside, the city’s gates slammed shut. Looking up the city walls, he saw them rising higher, and  he could hear a dreadful sound coming from beyond them. “What kind of place is this?” he thought, and he became terrified when he saw a man whose head was cut by a wheel made of sword blades that was rotating above his head. 
“ ‘ “Hey, you! What is this?” he asked, and that hell being replied, “This is a personal hell.”
“ ‘Maitrāyajña asked, “What sins have you committed?” 
“ ‘The man told his story:  “In the Jambu continent there is a city called Mahākośalī. There I used to live, and I, too, happened to be a son of a sea merchant. Surrounded by five hundred friends, I went to the city’s large orchard. 
“ ‘ “There my friends said, ‘Your father is the head of the sea merchants’ guild. And following his lead, they, our fathers, traveled to foreign lands and procured vast riches. They saw the Golden Island, the island of Sri Lanka, and many other islands. We, too, with you as our leader, will travel to foreign countries.’ So they pledged. 
“ ‘ “Then I went home and said to my mother, ‘I will go aboard a ship and voyage the ocean to go to foreign countries!’ 
“ ‘ “My mother replied, ‘Son, your father, too, has gone aboard a ship, and having gone to many foreign countries, he died. Son, you are all I have left! Our house is filled with riches. Don’t go!’ 
“ ‘ “I, too, promised my mother that I would not go. In this way, mother clasped my feet three or four times, bidding me to stay, and I stayed. But at another time, I went to the orchard and my friends said, ‘We will go anyway.’ 
“ ‘ “ ‘Well, we should go then!’ I said, and by making this promise, we departed. 
“ ‘ “My mother clasped my feet at the door and said, ‘It is not right to leave me behind!’ But I stepped on my mother’s head and went off with my five hundred friends to the shore of the sea. 
“ ‘ “After we took up the eight precepts, we set sail. We were well on our way to the Golden Island when a strong gale caught us and capsized the ship, killing all the friends. As for myself, after many days I reached the end of the ocean. I started to wander, and after continuously walking I eventually arrived at a city with a golden city wall and an orchard and a lotus pond that was pervaded by a pleasant fragrance. I saw flower petals scattered everywhere and many wreaths made from silk ribbons that had been put up as ornaments. 
“ ‘ “From inside that city, four goddesses appeared,  thirty-two goddesses appeared, and so on as before, until I saw a city enclosed by an iron wall and went inside. As soon as I stepped inside, the gates slammed shut. There, too, I saw a man with a wheel made of swords rotating above his head. And there and then the wheel was transferred to where I was standing nearby, onto my own head. Due to the ripening of the karmic fruit of my action of having desisted from leaving home by obeying my mother’s words four times and taking up the eight precepts, I enjoyed a personal heaven in four cities. Due to the ripening of the karmic fruit of my action of stepping on my mother’s head when setting out, a wheel made of sword blades is now rotating above and lacerating my head.” 
“ ‘Upon hearing this, Maitrāyajña thought, “I, too, have in the past carried out an action that is very similar to that one. I can see that the ripening of the karmic fruits of my own action is immanent!” 
“ ‘The hell being asked Maitrāyajña, “Where do you come from?” 
“ ‘And Maitrāyajña told his story: “In the Jambu continent there is a city called Tāmalipta. I am from there. I, too, have done all those actions.” 
“ ‘ “It is true then!” said the hell being. “I heard a voice coming from the sky that said, ‘The karmic fruit of your action is exhausted. One will come whose name is Maitrāyajña, the son of a sea merchant, who has committed an action similar to yours.’ ”
“ ‘Maitrāyajña asked, “What kind of food do you eat here?” 
“ ‘ “I eat the flesh, pus, and blood flowing from my own shredded head.” Then this man died there. Maitrāyajña, terrified and distraught, made this aspiration for the sake of his mother:
“ ‘ “In all the countless worlds—
From the Peak of Existence downward, from the Avīci hell upward—
May the assemblies of gods, asuras, and mahoragas be happy,
And may their suffering be taken on by me!”
“ ‘With an earnest intention,  he bowed down in reverence to his imagined parents and made another aspiration: “Wherever I am reborn, I will honor my parents! I will remain here in this individual hell for the sake of those who will be reborn here. To those in the world who are engaged in proper conduct and those who are liberated, I bow in reverence. I pray that they will protect me.” And he stayed there as a being of this individual hell and made a further aspiration for the sake of his parents: 
“ ‘ “From the Avīci hell down below, up to the Peak of Existence,
May all the beings bound by the fetter of death,
As many as there are without exception, live happily, intent on virtue,
And may they experience the ageless, deathless nirvāṇa!” 
“ ‘Due to this utterance, the wheel remained in the air above, rotating but without touching his head. And also, because his mother perpetually made this aspiration, “If there is any benefit to be derived from the merit that I have accumulated through my practice of generosity, ethics, and being a faithful wife, may the fruit of this merit lead to the happiness of my son, whatever and wherever he may be,” he was at peace. 
“ ‘And having stayed there in this personal hell, he passed away before even sixty years had passed.’
“Accordingly, for example, King Ajātaśatru passed away without having entirely completed his lifespan in hell. But since the karmic fruit of actions do not dissipate, he sometimes suffered from excruciating headaches.
“Then, when the right time had come, the Bhagavān addressed the monks: ‘Monks, you may think that the sea merchant’s son named Maitrāyajña was just somebody else at that time. But this is not how you should see it. I myself was at that time the sea merchant’s son named Maitrāyajña. Therefore, monks, have faith in my words! You should cultivate reverence for the Bhagavān! You should cultivate reverence for the Dharma and the Saṅgha! You should also revere your parents,  your preceptor, and your teacher! Know this, monks: Those who travel to a foreign land can experience both pleasure and pain, just like Maitrāyajña, who after traveling to a foreign country experienced a personal heaven and a personal hell in a single lifetime. In this way,  action that leads to the experience of pleasure and pain in a foreign country will ripen accordingly in a foreign country.’ 
“Hence, the Bhagavān has furthermore said the following: ‘Whether something is done for me or for your parents, your preceptor, or your teacher, there is no difference, and the karmic result is the same, experienced either in this lifetime or the next. How, then, is the karmic result the same in this very life?’ 
“For example, once in Śrāvastī some poor person saw the Bhagavān, together with the Saṅgha of hearers, begging for alms. And because at that moment he developed reverence in his mind, he accumulated an immense stock of merit, and since this also created the action that led him to become a king, that reverence by itself became the seed for his liberation. When this came to the Bhagavān’s attention, he uttered the following verses: 
“ ‘Those who rejoice in it
Are no less remunerated 
Than those who carry out a service.
They are both equally entitled to a share of the merit.’ 
“And: 
“ ‘Mind precedes phenomena.
Phenomena appear due to mind, and they disappear due to mind. 
When one’s mind is truly devoted,
So will be one’s speech and action in every way,
Always following the person like a shadow.
Then, one will find happiness.’
“Then, at the moment of his death, he was reborn as a god. 
“Another example is that of the pratyekabuddha Tagaraśikhin. During a famine, a poor man had offered some broth, and because of that he was anointed king in this city on that same day. Later he became a pratyekabuddha. Furthermore, it is said in the sūtras that the karmic fruit of a mind full of devotion similar to that of the pratyekabuddha whose name is Tagaraśikhin will ripen in this very lifetime. 
“When he honored his parent, Maitrāyajña, the son of the sea merchant, experienced an individual heaven in four great cities because he had listened to his mother’s words and complied with them four times. Since it had become the seed for his liberation, the ripening of the karmic fruit took place in this life.
“Will one go to hell through expressing anger toward the Bhagavān and one’s parents? An example here is Devadatta, who, after he had become angry with the Bhagavān, fell into the Avīci hell immediately upon his death. Or there is the prince Utraka in the city of Rauruka in the land of Sindhu, who killed his father and consequently fell into the hell realms. Thus, one will go to the hell realms through expressing anger toward the Bhagavān or one’s parents. 
“Now, is there a difference with regard to the Buddha and one’s parents, or are they not different? Concerning the Bhagavān, generating devotion toward him, who during many hundreds of thousands of cosmic ages has accumulated a stock of merit generated by his roots of virtue, who taught the Dharma to those lacking a path, and who bestows awakening upon us, the karmic fruit is immeasurable. To parents the path to liberation is unknown. Furthermore, one need not always obey the words of one’s parents. Why not? Because there are some who hold false views and who say to their child, ‘Child, bring us to an uninhabited place—you will benefit from this and be happy!’ or ‘Abandon us in a chasm! Commit us to the flames!’ When they say such things, this ought not to be done. Why not? Because through murdering one’s parents one will certainly  go to the hell realms. Therefore, the Bhagavān has said not to accept those who have killed their parents into the novitiate and that such people should not be accepted for full ordination,  and for this reason such people should be shunned.
“How, then, are one’s parents, one’s preceptor, and one’s teacher equal? In this regard, the Bhagavān has said, ‘Parents love their children from the depths of their hearts.’ Therefore, when parents do not give their permission, one should not accept someone into the novitiate. Take, for example, the noble Rāṣṭrapāla, among others. When his parents did not let him go, the Bhagavān did not accept him as a novice. Still today ordination is not given without parents’ consent. Or, for example, it is said that when the Bhagavān himself adopted the life of a mendicant, his parents went blind out of grief for the loss of King Śuddhodana’s son, because they had wished for the birth of a son who would uphold their legacy in these five areas: ‘This son of ours that we will give birth to, after being born, will support us; he will continue to perform our duties; he will become the inheritor of our wealth; when we die, he will perform the ancestral food offerings; and he will continue the family lineage.’
“The preceptor and the teacher, however, have compassion as their priority. Their sole concern is this: ‘So long as he cannot adopt the life of a mendicant because his parents do not give their permission, how will this one who has been wandering in saṃsāra since time immemorial reach the end of it?’ For example, the Bhagavān says the following in the Vinaya: 
“ ‘The preceptor regards the pupil as a son. The pupil regards the preceptor as a father. Thus, they consider each other parent and child.’
“In this regard, the preceptor and the teacher are equal to the parents.  Furthermore, the Bhagavān says in the Cakravartisūtra:
“ ‘Which action leads to the karmic result of the wheel-turning monarch obtaining the precious elephant and the precious horse? Carrying one’s parents around on one’s shoulders, or having them mount a carriage drawn by a horse or by an elephant, and carrying one’s preceptor and one’s teacher oneself. The wheel-turning monarch obtains the precious elephant and the precious horse through the karmic ripening of the action of having others carried. For this reason, too, are the parents and the preceptor and the teacher equal. Furthermore, for householders, parents are the object of adoration. For those who have adopted the life of a mendicant, the preceptors and the teachers are the object of adoration. For this reason, too, are preceptors and the teachers equal to parents.’
“To give another example, the Bhagavān addressed the monks as follows:
“ ‘Monks, suppose someone took their parents on their back and roamed the Jambu continent with them, provided them with provisions, and filled the whole of the four continents with riches and gold—even this kind of generosity could not repay the parents’ kindness. But, if someone were to cause another person to develop faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha and establish them in the five precepts and in the moral conduct that is praised by noble ones, in this way children would be repaying their parents’ kindness. And that is precisely what preceptors and teachers do!’
“It is for this reason that the preceptor and the teacher are more distinguished than the parents. In short, ever since the time of the Bhagavān’s nirvāṇa, all those pacified and tamed monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen, and whoever else, have been pacified and tamed by their preceptors and teachers. It is because of this that the Bhagavān has said, ‘Monks, those who believe in my words should give rise to the highest faith in the Bhagavān, as well as in the Dharma and the Saṅgha! And they should give rise to the highest faith in their parents, their preceptor, and their teacher! This will lead to their benefit and happiness for a long time to come.’ This kind of action  leads to the ripening of a karmic result in a foreign country.
“What kind of action leads to a person being happy at first and becoming unhappy in the future? If someone were to ask this, one should reply as follows: ‘Here, a person is stopped by a beggar, for instance, and, asked for alms or a donation, delightedly accepts and then gives with joy but afterward regrets having given. When this person is reborn as a human in a rich and wealthy family, later the wealth is consumed and depleted. Then this person becomes poor, just as in the story of Gopaka. He had offered a milk cow to the fully enlightened Buddha Krakucchanda and his saṅgha of monks. But later, people made him regret it so that he thought, “It was not good to have given this.” Therefore, because he had regrets, wherever he was reborn, he first was rich and then later, due to these regrets, became poor. Later, he was reborn in Rājagṛha. His mother died at his birth and  people said, “His birth is the reason for his mother’s death! Since he was born under the constellation Mūla, he will destroy this family. He is bad luck!” And so they just discarded him together with his mother in the cemetery. But there, through the power of his merits, his mother’s breasts still produced milk. In this way, he nourished himself, developed fully, and eventually went to the Blessed One and became a monk. Thus, this was the karmic fruit of his action of first offering a milk cow with faith and then later regretting it. His offering with a faithful attitude in the beginning became the very seed of his liberation. But due to his later regret, it is said, he always ended up poor. This kind of action leads to a person being happy at first and becoming unhappy in the future.’ 
“What kind of action leads to a person being unhappy at first and becoming happy later? If someone were to ask this, one should reply as follows: ‘In this case, someone is asked to make an offering, accepts only very reluctantly, and accordingly makes the offering only reluctantly,  but following the offering they experience joy. Then, when reborn among humans, this person is born into a poor family at first, but later their wealth increases. This kind of action leads to a person being unhappy at first and becoming happy later.’
“What kind of action leads to a person being both happy at first and happy in the future? In this case, someone is begged by somebody for alms and delightedly and immediately agrees to give. And, having given alms joyfully, this person later, too, is happy. Then, when reborn as a human being, this person will be reborn in a very rich and very wealthy family.  This kind of action leads to a person being both happy at first and happy in the future.
“What kind of action leads to a person experiencing both suffering at first and suffering in the future? In this case, someone is without a spiritual friend, a spiritual preceptor, who would encourage him to give alms. Consequently, he gives nothing whatsoever. But he has neither done nor accumulated any bad actions at all. When he is reborn as a human being, he will be born into a poor family that has to survive with a scarcity of food and drink due to hardship. When born there, he obtains food and clothing only with great difficulty. Also, in the future his resources will not increase. This kind of action leads to a person experiencing both suffering at first and suffering in the future. 
“What kind of action leads to a person being wealthy and stingy? A person makes only a small offering to those who possess moral discipline and who are recipients worthy of offerings, but he does not make a habit of the attitude of giving away. Then, when he is reborn as a human being, due to the power of generosity, he will be born into a rich family  having great riches. However, because he did not make a habit of the attitude of giving away, he becomes stingy with his wealth. This kind of action leads to a person being wealthy and stingy. 
“What kind of action leads to a person being poor and generous? In this case, a certain person makes offerings liberally to animals and to people who are ill behaved. Then, when he is reborn as a human being, he will be both poor and generous.  By virtue of having made practicing generosity a habit, he will be poor yet generous. This kind of action leads to a person being poor and being generous. 
“What kind of action leads to a person being rich and generous? In this case, someone makes liberal offerings to those who possess moral discipline and who are worthy recipients of offerings and makes a habit of the attitude of giving. Therefore, when he is reborn as a human being, he will be rich, and his wealth will be extensive. For example, consider the householder Anāthapiṇḍada. He first offered Prince Jeta’s grove to the completely perfect Buddha Krakucchanda and had a monastery erected for the monks there. In the same manner, in former births he offered Prince Jeta’s grove to the completely perfect buddhas Kanakamuni, Kāśyapa, and Sarvārthasiddha, and he will equally offer it to Maitreya with its entire ground strewn with gold. This kind of action leads to a person being rich and generous. 
“What kind of person has exhausted their lifespan but not their actions? A person who dies in a hell realm and is reborn in that same hell realm, a person who dies as an animal and is reborn as an animal, a person who dies in the realm of ghosts and is reborn in the realm of ghosts, and a person who dies as a god and is reborn as a god. The brahmin Varṣākāra, for instance, died repeatedly and was reborn as a monkey.  Or, for instance, the aforementioned householder was repeatedly reborn as cattle. When a certain poor householder in Śrāvastī died, an ox with an ulcer on its shoulder was standing in front of the house. Because the householder was very attached to his house, after he had died, he was reborn as a maggot in the ox’s ulcer.  Immediately after he was reborn, a crow ate him, and later he was reborn in that same spot again as a maggot. In this manner, during one single day, he died and was reborn seven times in this same spot! 
“Or, for example, when the venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana was wandering through the country of Magadha collecting alms, he entered a house in which a householder sat together with his wife, holding their son in his lap. They were eating a meal of fish, while in front of them sat a dog, to whom they tossed the fish bones. Then, when the householder saw Mahāmaugalyāyana, he said to him, ‘Friend, nobody here gives alms to beggars. Go away!’ And Mahāmaugalyāyana turned around.
“At the door of that house, there had been sitting all the while some man who had come from another country and who knew the sthavira Mahāmaudgalyāyana. When he saw what had happened, he was amazed and said, ‘Oh dear! This venerable monk is the foremost among those possessing magical powers. He has tamed the kings of the nāgas, Nanda and Upananda. He shook the divine palace Vaijayanta with his left toe, and through that the king of the gods, Indra, marveled. He traversed the realm of the trichiliocosm in the blink of an eye. These things being so, it is astounding that he was sent away without having been offered alms!’ 
“Then, the sthavira Mahāmaudgalyāyana, to instill in him a sense of weariness with saṃsāra, said, ‘My dear, it is not so very astonishing.’ 
“ ‘Well, what then is astonishing?’ the man asked. 
“He replied, ‘This householder here, eating fish curry, is astonishing! The fish was his father. He would frequently scoop out and eat fish from the pond behind the house that carried a lot of fish.  Then he died and was reborn as this very fish. His son, too, frequently scooped out and ate that fish many hundreds of times.  And he, too, was reborn in that same spot many times, again and again. This female dog here was the householder’s mother. She, overpowered by greed, never made an offering to anybody. And she never safeguarded ethical conduct but instead meanly hoarded possessions for the sake of the family lineage. And after she had died with her thoughts attached to this same house, she was reborn here as that female dog. Then, after she died again, she was reborn again and again in this same place. This dog circles around the house on the outside for the whole night, afraid that somebody could enter. The son sitting in the lap of that man was the wife’s lover. When the householder found out that his wife was sleeping with another man, he pretended that he had to go to another city. As soon as he left, the woman slept with the other man, but her husband returned home and killed him. But because he was attached and attracted to that woman, he was reborn in her womb. See, my dear: The meat they eat is their father’s. The one to whom they toss the fish bones is the mother. The enemy, the adulterer, who is the one who was killed in a rage, they cradle in their lap. Therefore, it is only reasonable to feel disgust for the faults of saṃsāra, because this is truly astounding.’ 
“Then the monk Maudgalyāyana recited a verse to instill a sense of weariness with saṃsāra in the many people of the western regions: 
“ ‘With a consciousness obscured by delusion and desire,
He eats his father’s meat, 
Tosses his mother the bones, 
And nourishes his wife’s lover.’
“This kind of person is someone whose lifespan is exhausted but not their actions. 
“What kind of person has exhausted their actions but not their lifespan? A person who was happy at first and becomes unhappy in the future, or a person who was unhappy at first and in the future  becomes happy—this kind of person is someone who has exhausted their actions but not their lifespan. 
“What kind of person has exhausted both their actions and their lifespan?  A person who dies as a hell being and is reborn as an animal, a person who dies as an animal and is reborn in the realm of ghosts, a person who dies as a ghost and is reborn as an asura, a person who dies as an asura and is reborn as a human being, and a person who dies as a human being and is reborn as a god—this kind of person has exhausted both their actions and their lifespan.
“What kind of person has exhausted neither their lifespan nor their actions but has exhausted the kleśas? A stream enterer, a once-returner, a non-returner, and an arhat—this kind of person has exhausted neither their lifespan nor their actions but has exhausted the kleśas. 
“What kind of person is well in body but unhappy in mind? A worldly, ordinary person who has acquired merit is well in body but not in his mind—for example, the brahmin, the householder, the king Māndhātar, and so forth in the country of Magadha. This kind of person is well in body but unhappy in his mind. 
“What kind of person is happy in mind but unwell in body? For example, the arhat Karmaśa, who was happy in mind but unwell in body. Or, in the same manner, the noble Śoṇottara, who, in a former life, gave a ball made of cow dung mixed with cowhage to a pratyekabuddha for his bath. Through the complete ripening of this action, he suffered from leprosy spreading all over his body. The following verse is said to illustrate this:
“Acts are more powerful 
When their objects are precious.
When under their sway,
I will experience suffering.
“Or consider, for instance, Jaṅghākāśyapa: When a certain pratyekabuddha came to Benares, Jaṅghākāśyapa thought, ‘I will offer him a meal.’ Then, after a long time, he offered food after the appropriate mealtime had passed. Through this action, in a future time, when he had become a noble person himself, while going on his morning alms round, he arrived too late to obtain any food. A person like this is happy in mind but unwell in body. 
“What kind of person is well in both body and mind?  An arhat who has destroyed the contaminants and who has accumulated merit. For example, Bakula, the son of the king Dharmayaśas, roared this lion’s roar: ‘In the eighty years since I have gone forth, I have not even experienced a light headache.’ In the past, he was a perfume seller in Benares. There he offered medicine to cure the sick to the Buddha Krakucchanda and his saṅgha of hearers. Also, he once gave a myrobalan fruit to an arhat. Through the karmic ripening of these actions, he was free from illness and obtained perfect health. This kind of person is well in both body and mind.
“What kind of person is not well in both body and mind? An ordinary person who has not accumulated any merit, roves about other peoples’ homes, has no family or kin, and is without clothes, food, and drink. This person furthermore suffers from diseases like leprosy, chronic cough, dysentery, ulcers, skin rashes, and so forth, or this person is missing limbs, such as a foot or a hand, or is blind. Such a person is unwell in body and in mind.
“What kind of person has a pleasing body that is beautiful, shiny,  of brilliant color, handsome, and lovely to look at despite being reborn in the lower realms? A wicked person, whose wickedness is due to desire, who is reborn in the lower realms—for example, the peacock, the parrot, the thrush, the goose, the ruddy shelduck, and so forth. In this way, when a person behaves wickedly due to desire, they will have a pleasing body that is beautiful, shiny, of brilliant color, attractive, and lovely to look at, despite being reborn in the lower realms. 
“What kind of person is reborn in the lower realms with an unpleasant appearance, rough skinned and unattractive? A wicked person, whose wickedness is due to hatred,  who is reborn in the lower realms—for example, the tiger, the lion, the raven, the jackal, the bear, the spectacled cobra, ghosts, flesh-eating demons, and so forth. In this way, when a person behaves wickedly due to hatred, they will be reborn in the lower realms and with an unpleasant appearance, rough skinned and unattractive. 
“What kind of person is reborn in the lower realms, in a foul-smelling place, with underdeveloped and slow faculties? A wicked person, whose wickedness is due to ignorance, who is reborn in the lower realms—for example, the muskrat, vermin, the constrictor, the louse, the black honeybee, and other bugs, as well as the twenty kinds of worms living in the human body. Such a person is reborn in the lower realms, in foul-smelling places, with underdeveloped and slow faculties. 
“There are ten courses of action that are nonvirtuous. What are the ten? There are three actions of the body, four actions of speech,  and three actions of the mind. The karmic ripening of those ten nonvirtuous courses of action causes the ten kinds of external things to deteriorate.
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of killing, the earth loses its vitality and luster. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that one will have a short lifespan. 
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of stealing, hail, birds, locusts, mice, vermin,  and so forth will appear on the earth and eat the crops. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that one will experience the loss of one’s wealth. 
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of sexual misconduct, bad-smelling herbs and forests will grow on the earth. The karmic result equivalent to the action is entering the state of a prosperous layman or laywoman. In this regard, there are three avadānas: the avadāna of Śvabhrapāda; the avadāna of Susudhī, the unfaithful wife of the king of Benares; and the avadāna of Kālodāyin in his former rebirth in Devāvataraṇa.
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of lying  come diseases of the mouth and throat, bad breath, and so forth. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that one will be deceived by lies.
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of slander, painful sensations arise from the touch of pebbles and gravel on the ground. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that one’s servants and retinue are likely to be divisive.
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of harsh speech, winds carrying dust and dirt will rise, and heavy rains and so forth will fall to the ground. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that one will hear unpleasant sounds and see unpleasant sights. 
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of idle talk, high and low grounds,  deep valleys, ravines, precipices, and so forth will materialize. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that no one will believe one’s words.
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of covetousness, fruits, as well as the seed heads of barley, wheat, and so forth, will be small. These and other faults of awn and stalk will be rife. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that one’s possessions will be carried off by strangers.
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of malice, the field crops and fruits will be pungent and bitter. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that one will see repulsive things.
“Through the karmic ripening of the nonvirtuous action of wrong views, small fruits that are poisonous and putrid smelling, and so forth, or no fruits at all, will appear. The karmic result equivalent to the action is that one will be a nihilist and believe in the treatises of the nihilists, the wrong view of annihilation or that of the materialists, and other wrong views.
“The more one cultivates the courses of the ten nonvirtuous actions, the stronger they become. Therefore, during the eon of the universe’s dissolution, even if there are sesame seeds, no sesame oil can be produced; even if there is sugarcane, no sugarcane juice can be produced; even if there is sugarcane juice, no sugarcane molasses and no sugar can be produced; even if one has a cow, it will not produce any milk;  and even if one has milk, no butter will be produced. In this way, as an effect of the karmic ripening of the ten nonvirtuous actions, external things will deteriorate.
“By way of correctly adopting the ten virtuous courses of action, the external world will thrive. What are the ten?
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up killing living beings, the productivity and vitality of the soil will not be lacking.
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up stealing,  no mice and worms will appear, and no hail and no famines, and so forth, will occur. 
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up sexual misconduct, no deposit of dirt and dust, no wind, and no torrential rains will occur. 
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up lying, no unpleasant smells will occur.
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up slander, ravines, precipices, swamps, cesspits, and ditches will not appear.
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up harsh speech, one’s feet will not come into contact with pebbles, gravel, and potsherds.
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up trivial talk, no thickets of grass, impenetrable forests, or thickets of thorns will appear.
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up covetousness, field crops and so forth will always bear fruit.
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up ill will, harvests will be abundant, and the fruits and seeds will not be bitter and pungent.
“Through the karmic ripening of giving up wrong views, one will not get seeds that produce no or only very small fruits. By way of properly engaging in these ten virtuous courses of action, the ten external kinds of things will flourish. 
“Now, regarding killing, one should know that ten evil consequences will ensue. What are the ten? One will have many enemies; one will see  repugnant things; one will have immoral thoughts that will lead to the destruction of living beings; one will sleep feeling uneasy; one will wake up feeling uneasy; one will have bad dreams;  at the time of one’s death one’s mind will be clouded; one will feel remorse; one will do and accumulate actions that lead to a short lifespan; and after one has died, one will fall into the lower realms of existence, into evil destinies—one will be reborn in the hell realms. 
“Regarding stealing, one should know that there are ten evil consequences. What are the ten? One will receive enmity; one will have qualms; one will wander about at inappropriate times, for instance at nighttime; one will associate with bad friends; one will be abandoned by good friends; one’s ethics will be faulty; one will receive harm through regal punishment; one will receive harm through penalty; one will do and accumulate actions that lead to being bereft of one’s wealth; and after one has died, one will fall into the lower realms of existence, into evil destinies—one will be reborn in the hell realms. 
“Regarding sexual misconduct, one should know that there are ten evil consequences. What are the ten? Those who sleep with others’ wives will likely be attacked by Māra; there will be quarreling with one’s partner; one’s nonvirtuous characteristics will increase; one’s virtuous characteristics will starkly diminish, and eventually they will be lost completely; one will be unable to hide and to protect oneself, one’s children, one’s wife, or one’s wealth; one will have pangs of conscience; one will not be trusted by one’s close friends, family members, paternal relatives, or maternal relatives; one will do and accumulate actions that will lead to committing adultery and the like; and after one has died, one will fall into the lower realms of existence, into evil destinies—one will be reborn in the hell realms. 
“Regarding lying, one should know that there are ten evil consequences. What are the ten? One will have bad breath;  the deities will leave one’s body; nonhuman beings will seek an opportunity to harm; even when one speaks the truth, as a liar one will not be trusted; one will speak even more lies; in matters that one must accept on faith, one will not think it necessary to consult the experts; one will praise, extol, and voice untruth; poetry will be nonexistent; one’s words will not be received sympathetically; one will do and accumulate the action of slandering; and after one has died, one will fall into the lower realms of existence, into evil destinies—one will be reborn in the hell realms. 
“Regarding the loss of mindfulness induced by drinking beer made from fermented barley and other intoxicating liquors, thirty-six evil consequences should be known. What are the thirty-six? In this lifetime one’s wealth will be lost; one will become a ground for disease; quarrels, fights, and conflicts will increase; one will expose oneself; one will disgrace oneself; one’s intelligence will deteriorate; one will not obtain new possessions; one will completely lose the possessions that one has acquired; one will preach secrets in public; one will fail in carrying out one’s duties; one will become a source of suffering for others; one will become weak; one will have disrespect toward one’s mother; one will have disrespect toward one’s father; one will have disrespect toward śramaṇas; one will have disrespect toward brāhmaṇas; one will pay no respect to the head of the family; one will have no reverence toward the Buddha; one will have no reverence toward the Dharma;  one will have no reverence toward the Saṅgha; one will be associated with bad friends; one will be completely abandoned by virtuous friends; one will become shameless; one will become immodest; one will become someone who has no self-control; one’s mindfulness with regard to women will fail; one will appear unattractive to many; one will be in disharmony with many people;  one will be loathed by one’s paternal and maternal relatives and the noble ones; one will ardently embrace what is not the true Dharma; one ardently abandons the true Dharma; one will not want to pay attention to the experts; one will indolent regarding what one should be careful about; one will be far away from nirvāṇa; one will do and accumulate actions that lead to intoxication; and after one has died, one will fall into the lower realms of existence, into evil destinies—one will be reborn in the hell realms. 
“There are ten blessings of paying homage at a tathāgata’s stūpa with one’s palms joined in reverence. What are the ten? One will obtain birth in a distinguished family, an excellent body, and a large entourage of servants, and one will receive plentiful offerings and veneration; one will obtain extensive wealth, great erudition, great faith, an excellent fragrance, great intelligence, and great wisdom. These are the ten blessings of paying homage at a tathāgata’s stūpa with one’s palms joined in reverence.
“There are ten blessings of prostrating to a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One’s body will be pleasing and will have a color like that of gold; it will be attractive and lovely to behold; one will have a pleasant voice, and one’s words will be creditable;  one will move fearlessly in an assembly; one will be dear to gods and humans; one will be a very charismatic person with considerable prestige; the buddha-bhagavāns, the bodhisattvas, and the Buddha’s hearers will be one’s company; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of prostrating at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of sweeping at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One’s body will be pleasing, a pleasure to look at, and beautiful, and one will have a pleasant voice; one’s attachment, hatred, and ignorance  will diminish; when one walks on a path, there will be no grass, gravel, or pebbles; one will be born into a noble family; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of sweeping at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of offering a parasol at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One will be like a parasol in the world; one’s body will never be scorched by heat; one’s mind, too, will not be distressed; one will become a support for the world; one will do and accumulate actions that lead to becoming a sovereign; one will obtain the empire of a wheel-turning monarch; one will become a powerful notability; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings  of offering a parasol at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of offering a bell at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One’s body will be pleasing; one will have a pleasant voice; one will speak charmingly; one’s speech will become like the voice of the kalaviṅka bird; one’s words will be received sympathetically; one will become exceedingly happy; one will hear delightful, sublime sounds; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a bell at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of offering a flag at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One will be like a victory banner in the world; one’s close friends, family members, paternal relatives, and maternal relatives will show one respect, and one will be revered, venerated, and worshiped by them; one’s glory, praise, renown, and good reputation will manifest in all directions;  one will have a pleasing body and will be a pleasure to look at and beautiful; in one’s future lives one will have a long lifespan, and one will stay long; one will become a powerful notability; one will be born into a noble family; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a flag at tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are twelve blessings of offering garments at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the twelve? One will be beautiful and lovely to behold; one will have skin that is soft,  silken, and fine; dust and dirt will be unable to stick to one’s body; one will possess fine carpets; one will possess fine clothes; one will have a conscience; one will be endowed with decorum; one will be delightful to look at; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the twelve blessings of offering garments at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of offering a flower at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One will become like a flower in the world; one’s sense of smell will never deteriorate; one’s body will never smell bad; one’s body will exude fragrance; the fine fragrance of moral discipline will pervade the cardinal and intermediate directions; worldly deities will gather and surround one; one will obtain all attractive qualities; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a flower at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of offering a garland at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One will become garland-like in the world; one’s body  will never smell bad; the fine fragrance of moral discipline will pervade the cardinal and intermediate directions; one will always be fragrant; one will always be adorned; one’s entourage will be undivided;  one will be appealing to women; one will enjoy vast resources; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a garland at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of offering a light at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One will become like a lamp in the world; one’s physical eyes will be completely purified; one will become clairvoyant; the wisdom to discriminate virtuous and nonvirtuous qualities will emerge; ignorance and the darkness of mental obscuration will be cleared away; the light of wisdom will dawn; even while wandering in saṃsāra, one will not be in darkness; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a lamp at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of offering scented water at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten? One will become perfume-like in the world; one’s sense of smell will be completely purified; one’s body will never smell bad; one will always be fragrant; one’s body will be pleasing; worldly deities will gather and surround one; one will obtain all attractive qualities; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering scented water at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are ten blessings of offering music and cymbals at a tathāgata’s stūpa. What are the ten?  One’s body will be pleasing and lovely to behold; one will have a pleasant voice; one’s speech will be charming; one will be famous; one’s words will be creditable; one will always be joyful; one will obtain an exalted voice that pleases all; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering music and cymbals at a tathāgata’s stūpa. 
“There are eighteen blessings of erecting a tathāgata stūpa. What are the eighteen? One will be born in a noble family; one’s body will be pleasing; it will be beautiful and a feast for the eyes; one will become a powerful notability; one will have a very large retinue; one’s entourage will be undivided; one will have great prosperity; worldly deities will gather and surround one; one will become a support for all; one’s glory, renown, and good reputation will spread throughout the ten directions; one will be celebrated by gods and humans; one will possess great riches and wealth; one will obtain the empire of a wheel-turning monarch; one’s lifespan will be long; one will have an adamantine body; one will be endowed with the major and minor physical marks; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa.  These are the eighteen blessings of erecting a tathāgata stūpa. 
“What are the ten blessings of offering a cushioned seat? One will enter a high rank in the world; one will become praiseworthy; one’s glory, praise, renown, and good reputation will spread far and wide; one will have much happiness and satisfaction of mind; one will be furnished with a carriage, a cushioned seat,  and servants; worldly deities will gather and surround one; one will have great prosperity; one will become a powerful notability; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a cushioned seat. 
“What are the ten blessings of offering shoes? One will never lack a carriage; one’s legs will be well formed; one will persevere when traveling on a road; one’s body will not get tired; when walking, one’s feet will not be injured by thorns, gravel, or rocks; one will obtain magical powers; one will have servants; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering shoes. 
“What are the ten blessings of offering a bowl? One will become like a container for all good qualities of the world; one’s complexion will be radiant; one’s mindstream will be supple; one will not suffer thirst; if thirsty, water will appear; one will not be reborn among  the ghosts; one will be dear to gods and humans; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a bowl. 
“What are the ten blessings of offering food? One will have a long life; one will have a beautiful appearance; one will be powerful; one will possess good memory and will be quick witted; one will move intrepidly in an assembly; one will easily sway the assembly in one’s favor; one will be dear to gods and humans; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering food. 
“What are the ten blessings of offering a vehicle? One’s feet will always be youthful; one will be surefooted; when walking, the body will not get tired; one will be happy; one will not have many enemies; one will obtain the excellent four bases of magic powers; one will never be short of a means of transportation; one will have servants; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a vehicle. 
“The blessings of giving shelter are many. What are they? The one who gives shelter will be fearless; one will obtain very soft mats and clothes; and one will obtain the five objects of sensual pleasures of gods and humans. If someone should wish, ‘May I be born into a family of a great and exalted royal lineage,’  or ‘May I be born into a family of a great and exalted brahmin lineage,’ or ‘May I be born into a family of a great and exalted householder lineage,’ then this wish will be fulfilled. Should one wish, ‘May I become the chief of a village,’ or ‘May I become the chief of a town,’ or ‘May I become the chief of a large city,’ or ‘May I become chieftain of a remote border-city,’ or ‘May I become ruler of a vassal kingdom,’ or ‘May I become a powerful monarch,’ then this wish will be fulfilled accordingly. Should one wish, ‘May I become the sovereign of one continent,’ or ‘May I become the sovereign of two continents,’ or ‘May I become the sovereign of three continents,’ or ‘May I become a wheel-turning monarch,’ then one’s wish will be fulfilled. Should one wish, ‘May I be born having equal status with the devas belonging to the retinue of the Four Great Kings,’ then this wish will be fulfilled. Or, the wish ‘May I be born having equal status with the devas of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the devas of the Yāma class, the devas of the Heaven of Joy, the devas of the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, and the devas of the Heaven of Mastery over Others’ Emanations’  will be fulfilled. Should one wish, ‘May I be born having equal status with devas belonging to Brahmā’s Retinue,’ then this wish will be fulfilled. Or, the wish ‘May I be born having equal status with the devas of the heavens called Brahmā’s Ministers, Great Brahmās, Limited Radiance, Boundless Radiance, Luminous Radiance, Limited Virtue, Boundless Virtue, Perfect Virtue, Cloudless, Abundance of Merit, Great Fruit, None Greater, Sorrowless, Beautiful, Delightful Appearance, and those of the Highest Heaven”  will be fulfilled. Should one wish, ‘May I be born having equal status with the devas belonging to the Sphere of Infinity of Space, the Sphere of Infinity of Consciousness, the Sphere of Nothingness, and the Sphere of Neither Perception nor Nonperception,’ then this wish will be fulfilled. Should one wish, ‘May I attain the fruit of becoming a stream enterer,’ then this wish will be fulfilled. Should one wish, ‘May I attain the fruit of becoming a once-returner, a non-returner, and an arhat, and may I attain the awakening of a pratyekabuddha,’ then this wish will be fulfilled. Should one wish, ‘May I completely awaken to the unsurpassed completely perfect awakening,’ then this wish will be fulfilled. These are the many blessings of offering shelter. 
“What are the ten blessings of offering a beverage? All one’s sense faculties will be complete; one will have a bright forehead, and one’s face will be as if always smiling; one will be endowed with merit; one’s mindstream will be supple; one will not suffer thirst; even when thirsty, water will appear; one will not be reborn as a ghost; one will have great prosperity; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of offering a beverage. 
“What are the ten blessings of monastic renunciation?  The one who renounces will not hanker after offspring, a spouse, or riches; one will not be in the grip of desire; one will delight in living in a forest as a recluse;  one will be devoted to the Buddha; one will avoid the realm of Māra; one will thoroughly strive for those qualities that cause one to obtain the happy, higher realms of existence and avoid those qualities that cause one to fall into the lower realms of existence; one will desire nothing, either from gods or from humans; one will always become a nun or monk in the Buddha’s teaching; one will be reborn in heaven; and one will quickly attain complete nirvāṇa. These are the ten blessings of monastic renunciation. 
“What are the ten blessings of retreating to the forest life? One will leave behind society; one will resort to strict seclusion; one’s mind will focus on contemplation; one will aspire to the state of the buddha-bhagavāns; joy, happiness and gladness will arise in the body; obstacles will not occur; one will develop full understanding of the meaning of the Dharma as one has received it; one will reach calm abiding; and one will reach insight. These are the ten blessings of retreating to the forest life. 
“What are the ten blessings of living on alms? One will become accustomed to walking; one will become familiar with one’s alms round; one’s arrogance will be cut off; one applies oneself purposefully for one’s gain; one will firmly establish others in virtue; one will elucidate the teachings of the Buddha; one will make them shine for future generations; one will not cause harm for one’s companions in the holy life; one will establish a humble attitude; and for the well-disciplined ascetic, alms will manifest without obstruction.
“What are the ten blessings of the ten kinds of confidence? With confidence one enters a village; with confidence one leaves the village;  with confidence one enters into homes; with confidence one teaches the Dharma in an assembly; with confidence one appears among the saṅgha; with confidence one approaches one’s preceptor and teacher; with confidence one approaches one’s disciples with kind thoughts; with confidence one uses one’s permitted possessions: robes, begging bowl, bedding, and medicine to cure illnesses; with confidence one loudly performs one’s recitations; and with confidence one passes away at the time of death.
“Brahmin youth, it is like this: beings are owners of their own actions, they originate from their actions, they are heirs of their actions, and they take action as their refuge. Beings are divided into high, middle, and low by their actions. From now on, honor what I have said!” 
When the Buddha had finished this discourse on Dharma, the brahmin youth Śuka developed faith in the Bhagavān and said, “Gautama, when you intend to go to the houses of other lay people in Śrāvastī, I beg you to consider also going to the house of my father, the brahmin Taudeya. This will lead to happiness and benefit in the house of the brahmin Taudeya for a long time.” By remaining silent, the Bhagavān consented to the brahmin youth Śuka’s request. Then, when the brahmin youth Śuka recognized that the Bhagavān had consented through silence,  he was delighted about the Bhagavān’s teachings. Having rejoiced, he departed from the Bhagavān. 
“The Exposition of Karma” is complete.