{{translation:{id:UT22084-072-030,key:toh330,version:1.0.6,style:plain}}}
The Shorter Devatā Sūtra
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was staying at Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s park at Śrāvastī, when a divine being approached the Blessed One, paid homage by bowing its head to the feet of the Blessed One, and sat down to one side. Thereupon the divine being asked the Blessed One:
“With what discipline, what conduct,
What qualities, what actions,
What manner of living, and what wisdom
Do beings go to the higher realms?”
Touched by compassion for the divine being,
The Teacher told him:
“O divine being, listen to me!
These beings go to the higher realms:
“Those who turn back from killing,
Who uphold the law and delight in restraint,
Who do not harm any beings— 
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Those who abandon taking what is not given
And always delight in giving,
Who abandon stealing and do not steal—
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Those who do not approach the spouses of others,
Who abandon sexual misconduct,
Who are satisfied with their spouses—
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Those who do not tell lies,
Either to steal in the interest of others,
Or for their own sake, or out of fear— 
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Those who give up slander,
Which constantly separates friends,
And delight in appreciation—
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Those who abandon hurtful harsh words,
Spoken with contempt,
And who speak with gentle words—
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Those who abandon
Meaningless and idle talk,
And when appropriate, expound the Dharma—
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Either in villages or in remote places,
Those who do not have any desire 
To claim another’s possessions as their own—
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Those who, with a loving mind,
Do not hurt, and without ill will
Do not harm any being—
Those beings go to the higher realms.
“Those who have confidence and faith
In both karma and the ripening of karma, 
And truly hold the correct view—
Those beings go to the higher realms. 
“These virtuous qualities
Are the tenfold path of the good Dharma.
Those beings who truly uphold them
Will go to the higher realms.
“I do not see many brāhmaṇas who have attained nirvāṇa,
Who have overcome all enemies and fears,
Who have crossed over,
Free from attachment to the world.”
After the Blessed One had spoken thus, the divine being rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
Thus concludes “The Shorter Devatā Sūtra.”
Translated, edited, and finalized by the senior editor and translator Bandé Yeshé Dé.