{{translation:{id:UT22084-083-015,key:toh467,version:1.0.1,style:plain}}}
The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of all Tathāgatas
Homage to Mañjuśrī-Yamāri!
Chapter 1: The Practice Sequence
Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavat was dwelling in the bhagas of all vajra women, who are the essence of the body, speech, and mind of all tathāgatas. He was there with Yamāri’s large assembly, which included Yamāri Mohavajra, Yamāri Piśunavajra, Yamāri Rāgavajra, Yamāri Īrṣyāvajra, Yamāri Dveṣavajra, Mudgara Yamāri, Daṇḍa Yamāri, Padma Yamāri, Khaḍga Yamāri, and, standing in the four intermediate directions, Vajracarcikā, Vajravārāhī, Vajrasarasvatī, and Vajragaurī. Then, Vajrapāṇi supplicated the Bhagavat, the vajra-being, the lord of all tathāgatas, prompting the Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, to emerge from the meditative absorption called the vajra that conquers all māras, the state of his own vajra body, speech, and mind. 
“In order to pacify the māras
And eliminate all hatred,
One should visualize Yama’s Slayer
By uniting the vajra and the moon. 
“For protection, one should visualize a vajra
Enveloped by five-colored rays of light
And likewise the outer boundary, the vajra ground,
The walls, and the canopy.”
Then the Bhagavat, the father of tathāgatas, entered the meditative absorption known as the tamer of māras and emitted the seed-syllables of all the deities beginning with Yamāri Mohavajra from his own vajra body, speech, and mind. In the center is ya, and then kṣe, ma, me, da, ya, ca,ni, rā, jā, sa, do, ru, ṇa, yo, ni, and ra.
“The first among the syllables ya and the rest becomes Yama’s Slayer.
The syllable kṣe expresses Moha, 
The syllable ma describes Piśuna,
The syllable me becomes Rāga,
And the syllable da is Īrṣyā.
These are known as the five Yamāris.
“The syllable ya becomes Mudgara,
From the syllable ca comes lord Daṇḍa, 
Padmapāṇi comes from the syllable ni,
And Khaḍgapāṇi comes from the syllable rā.
“The syllable ja expresses Carcikā,
From sa comes Vārāhī,
Do is declared to be Sarasvatī,
And ru recalls Gaurī.
“Ṇa, yo, ni, ra, in the four corners
Are held to be four skulls.
A terrifying crossed vajra
Should be imagined in the middle of the sky-vajra.
“One should visualize Yamāri, black and blazing,
Standing in its center.
In the east is Mohavajra
And, likewise, Piśuna is in the south.
“Rāgavajra is in the west
And, likewise, Īrṣyā is in the north.
One should visualize Carcikā and the others
On the four prongs of the vajra in the corners.
“On the four prongs of the vajra in the doors
One should visualize Muḍgara and the rest.
In the four corners of the crossed vajra
Are four human heads.”
Then, the Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, entered the meditative absorption called yamāri vajra and pronounced the mantra of the family of great hatred:
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of the great Mohavajra: 
oṁ jinajīk |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Piśunavajra: 
oṁ ratnadhṛk |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Rāgavajra:
oṁ ārolīk |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Īrṣyāvajra:
oṁ prajñādhṝk |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Mudgaravajra:
oṁ muḍgaradhṝk |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of the Daṇḍavajra: 
oṁ daṇḍadhṝk |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Padmavajra:
oṁ padmadhṝk |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Khaḍgavajra:
oṁ khaḍgadhṝk |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Vajracarcikā:
oṁ moharati |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Vajravārāhī:
oṁ dveṣarati |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Vajrasarasvatī:
oṁ rāgarati |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra of Vajragaurī:
oṁ vajrarati |
The Bhagavat, the lord of all tathāgatas, next pronounced the mantra that empowers body, speech, and mind: 
oṁ sarva­tathāgata­kāyavajra­svabhāvātmako ’haṃ |
oṁ sarva­tathāgata­vākvajra­svabhāvātmako ’haṃ |
oṁ sarva­tathāgata­citta­vajra­svabhāvātmako ’haṃ |
Then, the Bhagavat, the Lord of all Tathāgatas, described the body of great wrath:
“An adept should visualize Yamāri
As wrathful, with three faces and six arms. 
He is the color of a sapphire
And holds a vajra in his hand.
“Mohavajra should be visualized
As peaceful, with three faces and six arms.
He has a luminous, crystal-clear form,
And holds a wheel in his hand.
“Piśunavajra should be visualized
As enriching, with three faces and six arms. 
He has a luster like that of gold
And holds a jewel in his hand.
“Rāgavajra should be visualized
As enthralling, with three faces and six arms.
He shines like a ruby
And holds a lotus in his hand.
“Īrṣyāvajra should be visualized
As universal, with three faces and six arms.
He has a luster like that of an emerald
And holds a sheathed sword in his hand.”
This was the first chapter, “The Practice Sequence,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas. 
Chapter 2: The Great Maṇḍala
Then, all the blessed tathāgatas praised the blessed great vajra being: 
“Homage to you, vajra body.
You are the fearsome Yamāri,
The essence of Mohavajra,
The teacher with the nature of all buddhas.
“Homage to you, vajra jewel.
You are the fearsome Yamāri,
The essence of Piśunavajra,
Who is equal to the vajra mind.
“Homage to you, vajra speech.
You are the fearsome Yamāri,
The essence of Rāgavajra,
Who is equal to vajra speech.
“Homage to you, with sword in hand.
You are Yamāri who serves all functions,
The essence of Īrṣyāvajra,
Who is equal to vajra desire.
“Homage to you, lord of the maṇḍala.
You are the nature of all buddhas,
The confluence of all buddhas,
The most eminent of all buddhas.”
The Bhagavat then said, “Vajra eyes, vajra ears, vajra nose, vajra tongue, vajra body, and vajra mind.” This is the rite for empowering the eyes and the other senses. 
“Next, I will explain in detail
The fearsome maṇḍala of Yamāri,
Which appears just like Yamāri 
And fulfills every purpose.
“The learned practitioner should tie
The maṇḍala of Yamāri’s host
With a new, tightly woven thread,
One that is well measured and elegant. 
“All of its features are complete
And it eliminates all obstructive forces.
This maṇḍala, shaped as a circle,
Is used to pacify and so forth.
“In that maṇḍala one should draw
A karmavajra with five prongs on each end.
A vajra engulfed in a blaze of vajras
Should be drawn in its center.
“One should draw a sword in the north
And in the east a wheel,
Engulfed in wheel-shaped light.
“One should draw a jewel in the south 
That emits halos of light. 
One should draw a lotus in the west
That shines with ruby-colored light.
“One should draw a wheel in the southeast
That is engulfed in five-colored light.
One should draw a vajra in the southwest,
A lotus flower in the northwest
Radiantly blossoming upon its stalk,
And a water lily in the northeast
That radiates halos of light.
“There should be a hammer in the eastern gate
And, likewise, a cudgel in the southern gate, 
A lotus is in the western gate,
And, in the north, a vajra-sword.
“Knowing the maṇḍala to be complete
One should make special offerings.
One should fearlessly worship
Using the five sense pleasures.”
This was the second chapter, “The Great Maṇḍala,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 3: Ritual Activities
Then, all the blessed tathāgatas made a request using this king of praises:
“Protector, let the maṇḍala be drawn—
The fearsome maṇḍala of Yama’s Slayer.
It is the lord of all maṇḍalas 
That eradicates all misdeeds.
The great vajra bearer then issued the rite with the taste of nectar from his own body, speech, and mind:
oṁ āḥ hūṁ |
The vajra holders are pleased
By its contact with their vajra tongues.
It then enters all the buddhas
In their wisdom aspect, their intrinsic form. 
“One should then summon them, 
Draw them in, bind them and master them,
And then remain in meditative absorption
Using the four mantras of Muḍgara and the rest.
“After visualizing the vajra buffalo,
One should visualize the lord of the maṇḍala.
Mohavajra should be visualized standing
In the center of a moon disk.
“One should imagine the one named Piśuna
Standing in the middle of the seven-horsed one.
Rāgavajra should be visualized 
Standing in the center of the sublime disk.
Karmavajrin should be visualized,
Standing in the center of the karma disk.
“Mohavajra is for pacifying.
Accordingly, Piśuna is for enriching, 
Rāgavajra is for enthralling,
And Karmavajra is universal.
“Using the yoga of Karmavajra,
One should put human fat in a human skull,
Make a wick out of human hair,
And collect the soot while in a charnel ground.
“One should visualize Karmavajra
In the collyrium and likewise on the collyrium.
The collyrium siddhi will result
When combined with Karmavajra’s recitation. 
“One produces the foot-salve
Using saffron and blood.
One produces the swift-feet siddhi
By applying the practice of Karmavajra.
“If one gathers the five nectars,
Combines them with the five meats,
And coats them with the three metals,
The siddhi is gained through the practice of Karmavajra.
“The magnetic iron sword siddhi,
Can be accomplished with the yoga of Karmavajra.
While applying the practice of Karmavajra,
One can accomplish Karmavajra’s sword.”
This was the third chapter, “Ritual Activities,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas. 
Chapter 4: The Rites for Killing and so forth using the Yantras, Mantras, and Medicines Related to the Procedure for Vajra Killing
Then, all the blessed tathāgatas made a request to the blessed great vajra bearer using this king of praises:
“How should beings proceed,
Through the different categories of ritual action?
Great Vajra, please explain!
May the oceans of qualities listen!”
Then, the vajra-bearing king
Who has accomplished all ritual actions,
And has himself remedied all faults,
Spoke the following words.
The blessed tathāgatas, through the power of their vajra minds, bowed to, worshiped, made offerings to, and circled the Bhagavat three times. They bowed to him, again and again, and listened to what the Bhagavat said.
The vajra-bearing king
Taught the yantra for enthralling.
“The supreme circles of Yamāri
Have not appeared, nor will they appear.
“In order to enthrall women,
And likewise for protection,
In the pacifying rite use bovine bezoar
To draw a double circle
On birch or bamboo bark. 
“Append the target’s name with namaḥ.
And place it in two conjoined bowls
That are not black and lack a base.
The bowls should be filled with ghee and honey 
And wrapped with a white thread. 
“At the three junctures, facing east, 
One should scatter white flowers,
And focus on being Yamāntaka
Appearing like a candrakānta.
One should visualize the target on a moon disk before oneself
And confer the initiation.
“Imagine a multitude of perfect buddhas
Washing the target with a moon-white vase
Filled with the five nectars,
While reciting this mantra: 
oṁ namaḥ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ devadattāya śāntiṃ kuru namaḥ svāhā |
This is the rite for pacification.
“One should write with red saffron
When pacifying a man or when enriching.
The double circle is drawn with Kashmiri saffron
With the target’s name appended to svāhā. 
“It should be placed inside conjoined bowls
That have been filled with ghee and honey.
They should be wrapped with yellow thread
And strewn with yellow flowers at the three junctures. 
“One should imagine themselves as Yama’s Slayer,
Yellow in color and facing north.
The target, standing on a dark-yellow moon disk,
Should be cleansed using a yellow vase. 
“Once the target has been initiated,
One should recite the enriching mantra while radiating light:
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā | devadatta puṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā |
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ vauṣaṭ devadattasya puṣṭiṃ kuru vauṣaṭ svāhā |
This is the enriching rite taught by the Bhagavat. 
“On birch bark or a rag,
One should use lac fluid, red sandalwood,
Or blood from their own ring finger, as available,
To draw a double circle
With the syllable hoḥ appended.
“The circle should be placed in conjoined bowls,
That are not black and so forth,
And that are filled with ghee and honey,
Then wrapped with a red thread.
Facing west one should make 
Offerings of red flowers.
“One should imagine themselves as Yama’s Slayer,
Red in color and blazing fiercely,
And that the target stands
On a red moon disk.
“One should visualize the target being drawn in
With hooks of red light rays 
That emerge from one’s body, 
And recite the mantra ten thousand times as they spread.
“Imagining that the target is distressed,
Their legs are crippled,
And they are naked with their hair loose,
Begin the recitation.
“If the target is not enthralled,
The practitioner should heat the circle
Over a smokeless fire of acacia wood, 
Omitting the ghee and the rest.” 
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā | ho devadatta vaśaṃ kuru hoḥ |
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā | vauṣaṭ devadattasya vaśamānaya vauṣaṭ |
This is the enthralling rite taught by the Bhagavat.
“On cloth from a charnel ground
Or a rag smeared with menstrual blood,
One should draw a double circle
With a mixture of blood and lac.
“The target’s name should be framed
With the syllables jaḥ and hrīḥ,
And the circle placed in conjoined skull cups 
Made from the skulls of women.
This should be wrapped with red thread
And presented with offerings of red flowers.
“Imagining themselves as Yama’s Slayer,
Red like the setting sun, 
One should imagine
Seizing the target with red iron hooks.
“After hooks strike their heart
And a noose binds their neck,
One should imagine they arrive,
Naked, hair loose, 
Seated on a red lion,
Accompanied by circle of wind, 
And are cleansed with the five substances.
“If the target does not arrive,
The vow-holder should recite the mantra
While heating the circle
In a fire of acacia wood.
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ | hrīḥ amukam ākarṣaya hrīḥ |
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ jaḥ devadatta ākarṣaya jaḥ |
This is the summoning rite taught by the Bhagavat.
“The adept should draw a double circle
On cloth from a charnel ground,
Using a decoction of turmeric,
And write the target’s name
Appended to the syllable laṁ.
“The adept should place it
Inside conjoined bowls,
Place this on top of a yellow bowl,
And draw lines on it.
“The adept, in a state of meditative focus, 
Should draw seven or four lines.
Above that they should draw
The eight-peaked Mount Sumeru. 
“The syllables hūṁ and vaṃ
Frame Mount Meru,
And, above that, Indra’s maṇḍala
Should be drawn with the syllable laṃ. 
“It should be stamped with a crossed vajra
And wrapped with a yellow thread. 
One should imagine themselves
As the yellow Yama’s Slayer. 
“One should imagine the target to be yellow
And standing on Indra’s maṇḍala.
They are being crushed by Mount Sumeru
And crushed by Vajrapāṇi as well.
“One should imagine the target is crushed
By Mandara and the like,
And other various mountains
That are beneath Indra’s maṇḍala.
“While maintaining this visualization, recite the mantra:
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ laṁ devadatta sthāne stambhaya kuru laṁ |
This is the paralyzing rite taught by the Bhagavat.
“One who wishes to paralyze speech
Should draw a similar double circle, 
Add the target’s name,
And recite the pulsating mantra:
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ laṁ devadattasya yathāprārabdha­kāryakṛte tannivārayato virūpakaṃ vadato yajñādattasya vākstambhanaṃ kuru laṃ huṃ phaṭ |
This paralyzing rite was taught by the Bhagavat.
“This must be performed exactly as taught 
And with the utmost secrecy.
Using the practice of Black Yamāri
One will gain accomplishment in a single day.
“As before, the vow holder should draw
A double circle on a charnel ground rag.
Taking black mustard seeds, salt,
Poison, as well as neem, 
“The three hot spices, white mustard oil,
Charcoal from a charnel ground,
Juice from datura leaves,
And likewise datura seeds, saline soil,
“Blood from the index finger, 
And soot from a caṇḍāḷa’s pot,
And using a quill from a starved bird,
The vow holder should draw it on the fourteenth day,
At midday, with a wrathful mind,
In order to slay evil beings.
“To the syllable hūṁ one should append
The name of the person to be slain. 
The yogin, facing south,
Should embody Yama’s Slayer. 
“Of wrathful form and intensely fierce,
He is adorned with severed heads.
He stands on a buffalo, his tongue lolls, 
He has a large belly, and is terrifying.
“He is frightening, his blazing hair rises upward.
His beard and eyebrows are similarly yellow.
His first right hand holds a large vajra.
In his second is a sword,
And, in the third, a knife.
Now, to draw the left hands:
A wheel, a large lotus,
And a skull cup, are in his left hands.
“His main face is deep black,
His right like fine moonlight,
His left face is declared to be red,
And he is adorned with vajra ornaments.
“From his pores emanate 
The fearsome one, lord of his own family.
He stands on a sun disk
With his left leg extended.
He haughtily bares his fangs
And resembles the apocalyptic fire.
“Embodying this oneself,
One should imagine the target placed in front.
By striking with a poisoned blade,
The target becomes filthy and diseased. 
“They become naked, shake, grow depressed,
And speak pleading words.
Their body is covered with pus-filled sores—
The result of being sliced with a blade.
“After being tormented by frigid wind,
They find themselves in the midst of fire.
The wicked one, fearful of the host of buddhas,
Will be consumed by buffaloes,
Tigers, dogs, and crows.
“The target stands in Yama’s stomach,
Their body rife with thorns,
And their feet clasped in wooden stocks.
They are chopped into pieces, 
Their skin is flayed,
They are smeared with salt and mustard, 
And utter the syllable hūṁ
“Imagine them in one’s presence,
Their physical protections gone,
Stripped of their armor,
Their body completely vacant.
“Wrathful deities emanate from one’s own body
Similar in form to oneself as Yamāri.
They strike the target’s body 
And suck their fat and marrow.
“One should imagine Yama in front of them,
Powerful, with a cudgel in hand.
The cruel one strikes them, 
As vultures take to the sky
Carrying off their entrails and the like.
From below the ground, 
Nāgas and asuras strike at them.
“Experiencing the target in this way,
One should, while steeped in compassion,
Lift them from their saṃsaric state,
And lead them to a buddhafield.”
Then, all the blessed tathāgatas uttered these words with a particular intention in mind:
“How amazing indeed is this killing—
Killing that is not killing 
Because it frees from evil.
The one who was killed was not truly killed.
“One who has committed a thousand evil deeds 
Will not be born in the Avīci Hell or others.
How amazing is the greatness of the Buddha, 
That being killed leads to awakening.
“The killing of the murderous being
Is done by cultivating great compassion.
How amazing is supreme compassion.
Success will not come through weak compassion.
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ | hūṁ devadatta māraya hūṁ phaṭ | oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ | devadatta māraya phaṭ |
This was the fourth chapter, “The Rites for Killing and so forth using Yantras, Mantras, Medicines, Related to the Procedure for Vajra Killing,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 5: The Procedure for Drawing Yantras
“Next, one should draw a double circle
And append the syllable phaṭ.
One should write the target’s name
And put it into conjoined skull cups.
“This should be wrapped with a blue thread
And buried in a charnel ground at midday.
“While focused on being Yamāri,
One should place the target before themselves.
There are two targets, weapons in hand,
Mounted on a horse and a buffalo.
“One should imagine that, on both sides,
Are emanated hordes of wrathful beings.
With a mind steeped in wrath,
One should recite the mantra while visualizing
The two, powerful and fierce, in protracted battle.
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ | devadatta yajñādatte vidveṣāya hūṁ phaṭ |
This is the rite for sowing discord taught by the Bhagavat. 
“Following the same rite as before,
One should draw a double circle,
Augment it with the syllables hūṁ and phaṭ,
And put it inside conjoined skull cups.
“It should be wrapped with a black cord
And buried in an ancestor’s grove.
Maintaining the practice of Yamāri,
One should imagine the target before oneself. 
“Visualize a black wind maṇḍala, 
Born from yaṁ and shaped as a bow,
With a blue camel on it.
On it is the evildoer, facing south,
Being beaten by a furious horde.
Even a buddha would find this hard to reverse.
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ devadattam ucchāṭaya hūṁ phaṭ |
This is the expelling rite taught by the Bhagavat.
“The fierce yogin, facing south,
Should draw a double circle on charnel ground cloth
Using a decoction of goat blood, corpse ash,
Poison, salt, black mustard, and datura,
Following the ritual sequence.
“To kill, one should place the target on Yama’s body;
To sow dissent, on a horse and a buffalo;
To expel, standing on a camel;
To pacify, on a moon disk;
To enrich, on a yellow moon disk;
To enthrall, in a woman’s heart;
To summon, mounted on a goat;
To paralyze, in a ring of mountains;
And to summon, on a śarabha lion.
The other rites are defined in a similar manner.
“One should draw with bovine bezoar,
Lac, or Kashmiri saffron, as specified,
On birch bark in order to enthrall. 
If one’s mind is focused on virtue,
There is no doubt it will be successful.
“The circles should be placed in conjoined bowls.
After midday, one should write with a raven feather
On a cremation pyre or conjoined skull cups.
While focused on being Yamāri,
One should recite the mantra oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ…,
With the target of suppression facing south.
“For pacifying, the syllable ya at the edge is effaced,
As well as both the ni syllables.
Next, efface the syllable ya in the center,
And the remaining syllables as desired.
“One should do ten thousand preparatory recitations,
Which results in successful ritual action.
This is to be done with vajra wisdom
While focused on being Yamāri.
“There will be continuous strife
In a house where this terrifying circle remains 
After it has been drawn, 
With all the syllables still written.”
This was the fifth chapter, “The Sequence for Drawing Yantras,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 6: Drawing the Circle
Then, the lord of all the blessed tathāgatas supplicated the Bhagavat, the great vajra holder, using this king of praises:
“By applying the mudrā of anger,
Which delights the vajra holders,
And then sealing it with the vajra mudrā,
A vast array of siddhis are attained.” 
The vajra holder, the king,
Then made this statement:
“Visualize Yama’s Slayer
On the heads of all the maṇḍala deities.
“Continually draw the maṇḍala.
Continually satisfy with fire offerings.
Continually uphold the samayas.
Continually maintain the vows.
“First is the crown initiation.
Second, the sword initiation should be given.
Third, the vajra and bell initiation.
The eating of the moon is fourth.
“These are the four great initiations,
Sprung from the Black One’s mouth.
Through the uniqueness of these four initiations,
The children of the jinas attain awakening.
“Next, I will explain the mantra,
The means for offering bali to all spirits.
By merely reciting the great mantra
All spirits will tremble.
oṁ indrāya hrīḥ | yamāya ṣṭrīḥ | varuṇāya viḥ | kuberāya kṛ | īśvanāya taḥ | agnaye ā | nairṛtyāya na | vāyave na | candrāya hūṁ | arkāya hūṁ | brahmaṇe phaṭ | vasudhārāyai phaṭ | vemacitriṇe svā | sarva­bhūtebhyo hā | ha ha hi hi hūṁ hūṁ pheṁ pheṁ svāhā |
“Once the triangular maṇḍala is made,
Using a mixture of urine, feces, and water,
The yogin should satisfy the deities,
And should call to mind the syllables hā hā.
“The adept should draw 
Three concentric circles,
With eight, twelve, and sixteen cells
And place the mantra syllables throughout.
“The vow-holder should place
The perfected syllables in the twelve cells
The vow-holder will be victorious in every way
Over the three worlds, the animate and inanimate. 
ya ma rā jā sa do me ya ya me do ru ṇa yo da ya | ya da yo ni ra ya kṣe ya ya kṣe ya ccha ni rā ma ya
“Ya is to be placed in the center, kṣe to the east,
In the south, Mañjuvajra,
The syllable me is drawn in the west,
And in the north, dantadhāvanam.
“The target’s name should be added
In the empty intermediate directions.
By framing it with two hūṁs,
All ritual actions will be successful.
“The syllables ya, ccha, ni, rā, jā, 
Sa, do, ru, ṇa, yo, ni, ra, and the rest,
Should be drawn outside, from the left.
This will fulfill all aims.
“In the third ring, from the east, 
One should draw the syllables
Of the mantra beginning oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ
In every other cell.
“In each of the eight intermediate cells,
One should write, from the left
Mūkaṃ kuru,uccāṭaya,vaśīkuru,
vidveṣaya, śāntiṃ kuru, or puṣṭiṃ kuru,
Depending on the specific rite. 
“Oṁ is at the beginning and then namaḥ after that,
And then, after that, vauṣaṭ.
Furnishing these seeds with hūṃ and phaṭ
Effects the pacifying, enriching, and enthralling rites. 
This was the sixth chapter, “Drawing the Circle,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 7: The Procedures for Extraction and So Forth
“For the procedure to extract blood
The adept should meditate on Carcikā.
She has three faces, six arms, is emaciated,
Holds a wheel in her hand, and shines like the light of the moon.
“For the procedure to extract alcohol
The adept should meditate on Vārāhī.
She has three faces, six arms, the face of a sow,
Is dark blue, and holds a vajra in her hand.
“To increase knowledge
The vow-holder should meditate on Sarasvatī.
She has three faces, six arms, is red,
Peaceful, and holds a lotus in her hand.
“For the procedure to draw semen
The adept should meditate on Gaurī.
She has three faces, six arms, wields a sword,
And appears like an emerald.”
Then, the blessed Vajra Yama’s Destroyer entered the meditative absorption called killing and extracting and spoke the mantra of Carcikā: 
oṁ carcike siddhendranī­lahāriṇi ratna­trayāpakāriṇo rudiram ākarṣaya jaḥ |
“One should open their mouth
And then call this mantra to mind.
The great blood from the three worlds
Will be extracted, there is no doubt.”
Then, the blessed great Vajra Yamāri entered the meditative absorption called extracting alcohol and spoke Vajravārāhī’s mantra for extracting alcohol:
oṁ vajra­ghoṇe sughoṇe vajra­māmakī bhara bhara sambhara sambhara traidhātu­kāryam ākarṣaya jaḥ |
“One should make a pot with a beautiful mouth
Using clay from a potter’s hand,
Place it on a base of thief’s hair,
And call the mantra to mind.
“The great quality of this mantra
Was demonstrated at Caityapattana.
One should exert effort with gentle persistence 
And the alcohol extraction will be successful.”
Then the blessed Vajra Yama’s Slayer, the great samaya, entered the meditative absorption called the vajra perfection of wisdom and spoke the mantra of Sarasvatī: 
oṁ picu picu prajñāvardhani jvala jvala medhā­vardhani dhiri dhiri buddhi­vardhani svāhā |
“Beginning on the first day 
And every day until the full moon,
One should speak Sanskrit,
And continue, following the phases of the moon. 
“With the regular completion of one hundred ślokas
One will succeed in becoming a lord of speech.
One will find success throughout the three worlds,
Entirely and in every way.” 
Then, the blessed Vajra Yama’s Destroyer entered the meditative absorption called the extraction of semen and spoke Gaurī’s mantra for the extraction of semen:
oṁ ākarṣaṇi ākarṣaṇi gaurī hrīḥ duṣṭāya duṣṭāya śukram ākarṣaya jaḥ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ hūṁ hūṁ svāhā |
“From the mouth of the lotus and from the vajra,
Through the application of the bell, hook, and wind, 
An abundance of semen is extracted
By employing mantra and meditation. 
“These rites, eagerly employed
Over the course of seven nights
In a forest or isolated place,
Bring success, of this there is no doubt.” 
Then the blessed great Vajra Yamāri entered the meditative absorption called the vajra that terrifies death and set forth the samaya of the supreme initiation from his vajra body, speech, and mind. 
“Dear child, take garlands 
Of udumbara, mandāra, pārijāta,
And karṇīkāra flowers,
And be consecrated.
“Take the great sword of the triple world
That is venerated by all buddhas
And summons all spirits.
This sublime sword of activity
Is victorious over all māras. 
“Take the perfected vajra and bell,
The nature of insight and method, 
And accept the disciple.
“This most precious of drinks
Perfects the vajra body.
Dear child of omniscient wisdom,
Drink it so wisdom may arise.’
“It should then be poured into the disciple’s mouth, 
In order to accomplish Yamāri.
The eminent vajra disciple
Should cultivate feeling of great joy.”
This was the seventh chapter, “The Procedures for Extraction and So Forth,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 8: The Fire Offering Rite
Then, the vajra-bearing king 
Employed the protection circle procedure
And spoke in order to expel
Vighnas, vināyakas, and wicked beings.
“I, the glorious sword bearer,
Employ the protection circle procedure
Using the naturally blazing sword.
I offer worship through the three knowledges.
“Devī, you serve as witness
To the mode of conduct 
That protects all beings,
Especially to the bhūmis and perfections.
“I, the master, will draw
The maṇḍala of Yamāri.
“After covering the disciple’s face with cloth,
They should enter the door of the maṇḍala.
They should be asked, ‘Who are you?’
To which they reply, ‘I am a fortunate one.’
“The keen disciple who makes the request
Should be given access behind the curtain.
In order to receive initiation they should
Make this request devotedly three times: 
“ ‘Just as the Buddha initiated the vajra-being 
By means of the great Dharma,
I ask the protector to also initiate me,
And grant me a boon.’
“The disciple should offer song and music,
As well as respectfully anoint 
With bathing water and unguents,
And sing praises at that time.”
Then, the vajra-bearing king spoke the mantra of emptiness:
oṁ śūnyatājñāna­vajra­svabhāvātmako ’ham |
oṁ pūja­vajra­svabhāvātmako ’ham |
oṁ dharma­dhātu­vajra­svabhāvātmako ’ham |
“Next, I will explain the fire offering,
Based on its use in pacifying and other rites.
It is through fire offering that one gains the siddhi
That accomplishes all rites.
“Pacifying rites require a peaceful mind,
Enriching rites, an expansive mind,
Enthralling rites, a mind that has let go,
And this too for killing and expelling.
“For the pacifying, the fire pit is circular,
For enriching, like a water tank,
For enthralling, crescent-shaped,
And like the space element for killing.
“For pacifying, it should measure one cubit,
For enriching, two cubits,
As for enriching, so for enthralling,
And for killing, twenty finger-widths.
“For pacifying, half a cubit up,
For enriching, one cubit,
Ten finger-widths for killing,
And for enthralling, the same as summoning.
“Pacifying should be performed on the first day, 
Enriching on the full moon, 
The fourteenth day for hostile rites,
And enthralling rites on the eighth day.”
This was the eighth chapter, “The Fire Offering Rite,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 9: Fearsome Yamāri
“One should take soil from the ocean,
Make an image of a single nāga,
Place the syllables hūṁ puḥ at its heart,
And recite the mantra that begins hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ. 
Rain will fall at times of drought
By reciting the mantra ten thousand times, 
“The vow-holder should mix cobra meat
With leaves of the neem tree,
Roll the mixture into a pill,
Throw it into the ocean,
And recite the mantra ten thousand times.
This is the supreme means for arresting waves.
“One should take one hundred datura seeds,
Mixed with beans and rice grains,
And perform a fire offering with 800,000 recitations.
One will then behold the deity.
“The vow-holder should draw an effigy
With charred stick from a cremation pyre
And smear it with datura fluid.
After reciting the mantra 10,000 times the target will develop leprosy.
“One should take white mustard seeds,
Recite the mantra 400,000 times,
And scatter them over a person collapsed from snake bite.
That person will recover—there is no doubt.
“One should take clay from a gulch 
And recite the mantra 100,000 times.
Any headache will be cured
By smearing this on one’s head. 
“When one incants their hand seven times
And uses it to rub their head,
There will be no head pain—
About this there is no doubt.
“One should make an effigy of Yamāri
From the flesh of a brahmin 
And ash and soil from a charnel ground.
He should have two arms and one face,
Hold a large vajra in his right hand,
And a human head in his left.
He should be white and very frightening.
All wicked beings can be destroyed with this.
“The yogin should offer bali daily,
Using the five meats and the five nectars,
And the make the request, 
‘Annihilate my enemies!’
“When this is said at night, before sleep,
The enemy will be dead at dawn.
Or they will suffer from urinary blockage
Or fall sick with another illness.
“One should take the enemy’s vairocanā
And fill a human bone with it.
Once full, and once the mantra is recited 100,000 times,
One will be like a preta moving through treetops.
One will attain every excellent siddhi
And achieve the various goals.
This was the ninth chapter, “Fearsome Yamāri,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 10: Cultivating the Recollection for Mastering Vetālas
“Next, I will perfectly explain 
The sādhana of the great vetāla.
It effects every excellent siddhi
And leads to the achievement of the various goals.
“The vow-holder should find a corpse hanging from a tree— 
A corpse that is clean, unspoiled, and without wounds.
They should take it down, wash it well,
And incant it with mantra where it lays.
“Amazing, the power of mantra
Whereby the insensate cries out! 
The one who practices the yoga of Yamāri
Should be entirely without fear. 
Whatever it is the yogin seeks
Will be bestowed in full.
“One should craft an effigy
Of Yamāri’s terrifying form,
From the flesh, of a buffalo and crocodile,
As well as a tiger, 
A bear, a monkey,
And specifically, a dog.
One should also use poison, black mustard seeds, salt,
The three hot spices, and the moringa tree. 
“The yogi should make a request of this effigy
Using the mantra beginning hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ
And saying, ‘I seek so-and-so.’
Her father will then present her.
“If this does not come to pass,
If the yogin sees Yamāri strike her in a dream,
And carry her off to the south,
Her father will present her when the yogin wakes. 
“The vow-holder should visualize Mudgara Yamāri
As fearsome, with three faces and six arms.
He has the appearance of a sapphire
And has a hammer in his hand.
“Daṇḍa Yamāri has three faces and six arms,
And is red, wrathful, and terrifying.
Terrifying even to the terrifying.
The adept should place a cudgel in his hand.
“The adept should visualize the one called Padma Yamāri.
He has three faces, six arms, and is red in color;
He is extremely frightening, terrifying,
And holds a red lotus in his hand.
“One should visualize the one called Khaḍga Yamāri,
Who has three faces, six arms, and is green. 
He accomplishes all activities
And holds a sword in his hand.
“With one’s liṅga in the bhaga,
One should visualize the lord of the maṇḍala.
The yogin who has brought anger to mind
Should cultivate the recollection of ignorance.
“After making ignorance the object of recollection,
One should cultivate the recollection of miserliness.
The one absorbed in recollecting miserliness
Should next cultivate the recollection of desire.
“The vow-holder immersed in recollecting desire
Should recollect the one called jealousy.
Clouds of deities from each of their families
Emanate from their pores.
“The four wrathful ones should be visualized
Standing in the center of sun disks.
The four goddesses should be visualized
Standing on moon disks.
This was the tenth chapter, “Cultivating the Recollection for Mastering Vetālas,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 11: Revealing the Conduct
“Seeing that beings are overcome with hatred,
The Bhagavat, taking the form of Dveṣa Yamāri, 
Brings Yama under control
And lays waste to all hatred.
“Seeing that beings are overcome with ignorance,
The Bhagavat, taking the form of Moha Yamāri,
Brings Yama under control
And lays waste to all ignorance.
“Seeing that beings are overcome with miserliness,
The Bhagavat, moved by compassion,
Takes the form of Piśuna Yamāri
And lays waste to all miserliness.
“Seeing that beings are overcome with desire,
The Bhagavat, moved by compassion,
Takes the form of Rāga Yamāri
And lays waste to all desire.
“Seeing that beings are overcome with jealousy,
The Bhagavat, moved by compassion,
Takes the form of Īrṣyā Yamāri
And lays waste to all jealousy.
“Carcikā is said to be love,
Vārāhī is compassion,
Sarasvatī is joy,
While Gaurī embodies equanimity.
“The yogin, themselves perfected
As all those present in the maṇḍala,
Radiates from the seed syllable and their hearts;
Success ensues, there is no doubt.
“I will now explain 
The supreme qualities of the conduct
That perfects body, speech, and mind
Through Yamāri’s terrifying form.
“In a vastly forested area,
One should call and mount a supreme buffalo,
Adorn themselves with snakes,
And take up an iron vajra.
“One should also turn their hair yellow, 
Which should specifically flow upwards.
Skulls should ring their head 
And their beard should be turned yellow.
“While brandishing the iron vajra,
One should recite the mantra beginning hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ
And roar a lion’s roar,
While applying the practice of Vajra Yamāri.
“Once a little power develops,
One should playfully enter a village.
One should dance and ecstatically sing 
Songs using ṣāḍava and other scales.
“Seeing a row of banners,
One should perfect the milk there.
By focusing one-pointedly on the milk,
One will attain mahāmudrā.
“By embracing any woman
Who has taken the form of Vārāhī,
The courageous one acts like a lion
And accomplishes all desired aims.
“Next, I will explain
The method for the Hundred-Armed One
And will describe the recitation
Of the great one-syllable mantra.
“One should visualize the Buffalo-Faced One
Manifesting from the syllable hrīḥ.
He stands on a vajra maṇḍala
And is mounted on a buffalo. 
“The adept who practices
The mantra of the Buffalo-Faced One
Should imagine him holding various weapons—
Those that cut and those that pierce.
“Next, I will explain,
The practice of Daṇḍa Yamāri.
The syllable hrīḥ is his great mantra
And he has a buffalo as his mount.
“He is arrayed with two-hundred-thousand arms 
And his body, smeared with human ashes,
Is as high as Mount Sumeru
And reaches down to the golden ground.
“Next, I will explain
The method for the Ten-Million-Armed One.
He is the lord arisen from the syllable hūṁ
And vikṛtānana is his great mantra.
oṁ hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ vikṛtānana hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ ha hā hi hī hu hū he hai ho hau haṁ haḥ phaṭ svāhā |
“I will explain the samaya practice
That accomplishes all aims.
The food for those exhausted by the mantra
Is easy to obtain and beyond reproach.
“One should mix great flesh,
With horse and especially elephant,
As well as cow and dog,
Donkey, camel, jackal, 
“And the indigo plant,
And then rub it on one’s body with great oil.
One can enthrall the world
Simply by rubbing it on one’s body.
“One should mix vairocana and sinduvāra,
As well as bilva leaves,
A mixture of powdered brick,
And the juice of kanaka leaves.
“Simply by rubbing this on their limbs
One will enthrall the three worlds.
Poison, blisters, as well as leprosy
Are cured when one is smeared with it.
“One should drink the great urine
As well as vajra nectar.
This is the highest, best yoga,
As is drinking the self-arisen flower.
This was the eleventh chapter, “Revealing the Conduct,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 12: All the Unique Ancillary Rites
Then, the blessed Mahāpuruṣasamaya, Vajrasattva in essence, entered the meditative absorption of Carcikā’s form, then Vārāhī’s form, then Sarasvatī’s form, then Gaurī’s form, and performed these songs of offering: 
“Hey, Black Yamāri! Master!
You have the nature and form of a rākṣasa.
I am terrified when I look at you,
Please cast off this wrathful nature!
“The heavens, earth, and underworld
Quake from your dance.
Wrathful one, black as collyrium, 
You dance to appease the vetālas.
“Of dark, complex, and dwarfish stature, 
You emanate a variety of different forms.
Essence of great bliss, dance!
I, Vajrasarasvatī, supplicate you.
“With the hrīḥ ṣṭrīḥ mantra and your dance,
You cut through the confusion of the three existences.
Your liberating dance of compassionate wrath
Fills the world with faith and wonder.
“Next, I will explain
The supreme characteristics of mantra recitation.
Those who apply this mantra recitation
Will attain vast siddhis.
“Neither too quickly nor too leisurely,
Neither too long nor too short,
For the master of Yama, the supreme person,
The recitation should be barely audible.
“The recitation mālā should be made
From buffalo or human bones, 
Or those of an elephant, cow, horse,
Donkey, or camel.
“On the fourteenth day of the first month,
One should gather the five meats
Mixed with the five nectars.
Recitation then leads to the supreme siddhi.
“The yogi should visualize
Yamāri inside each bead.
Or, the adept can visualize them
As human heads covered in blood.
“When applying the practice of Vajra Yamāri,
Bhūtas will die after 10,000 recitations.
Ḍākinīs will die after one thousand,
As will the hosts of māras and pretas.
“After 100,000 recitations, the one immersed in yoga
Can perform any of the ritual activities.
After ten million repetitions, they will be granted siddhis, 
To say nothing of fifty million.
“Every day, every month,
Or even every year,
The adept should make sixty-four bali offerings
At the sixty-four daṇḍas.
“Whenever one has a little something to eat,
When they have little something to drink,
Or when they enjoy a full meal,
The best part should be offered to Yamāri. 
“Now, I will explain the gifts
That are to be offered to the master
In order to accomplish all activities
And to pacify oneself.
“The vow-holder should offer themselves,
As well as a horse, cow, or elephant,
Or gold, and beyond that,
Their own spouse and children,
Their mother, sisters, and nieces,
As well as their brothers.
“One should offer different articles of clothing,
A parasol and elegant tail whisk,
A home, a seat, and fragrances,
As well as songs and music,
A sword and jewelry.
This was the twelfth chapter, “All Unique Ancillary Rites,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 13: Identifying the Siddhis
“Now, the knife that severs
The evil deeds of beings,
However many there are, 
Is the sword that cuts through anger.
“Next, I will explain
The practice of Vajraḍākinī,
In order to accomplish remote hearing.
“One should imagine a sublime sun disk
Located in the center of the sky.
A five-pronged vajra should be visualized there, 
And a palace placed on top of that.
“One should visualize her
In a dark-blue, terrifying form.
She is six-armed and fearsome, 
With a vajra in one hand and the others in the rest.
“In the east is Buddhaḍākinī, 
Six-armed and resembling Mohavajra.
Terrifying with a wheel in hand,
She is visualized in the center of a yoga-maṇḍala.
“In the south is Ratnaḍākinī,
Six-armed and resembling Piśuna.
Blazing brightly with a jewel in hand,
She is visualized on the disk of the sun. 
“In the west is Padmadākinī, 
Six-armed and holding a lotus.
In the north is Karmaḍākinī,
On a bhaga maṇḍala holding a sword.
“In the four corners, beginning in the west, 
The vow-holder should visualize the goddesses,
Specifically Lāsyā and Mālyā, 
As well as Nṛtyā and Geyā.
“They should then focus on the door guardians
By following the prescribed method:
Mudgara, Daṇḍa, Padma,
And the other one, Khaḍga.
oṁ vajraḍākinī | oṁ buddhaḍākinī | oṁ ratnaḍākinī | oṁ padmaḍākinī | oṁ karmaḍākinī |
And for the corners: laṁ naṁ gaṁ maṁ |
oṁ mudgara jaḥ | oṁ daṇḍa hūṁ | oṁ padma vaṁ | oṁ khadga hoḥ |
This is the practice of Vajraḍākinī taught by the blessed vajra bearer.
“To accomplish remote hearing
One should visualize Vajraḍākinī.
In that way the mantra siddhi is attained.
oṁ ākāśacara ḍākinīye hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā |
“Next, I will explain
The practice of Vajrapātāla.
To attain the siddhi of moving underground
One should visualize Śumbhavajra.
“He has six arms, is blue and fearsome,
Holds a pestle aloft in his hand,
And is in the middle of the garbhamaṇḍala.
This is how he is to be arranged.
“Locanā should be placed in the east,
Māmakī in the south,
The goddess Pāṇdarā in the west,
And Tārā in the north. 
“Puṣpā, Dhūpā, Gandhā, and Dīpā 
Should be placed in the east and so forth.
Mudgara and the rest stand in the doors, 
All wearing snakes as belts.
“One should visualize the maṇḍala in this way,
Following the prescribed method.
Those who train in Vajrapātāla
Will see a path in their dreams.
“Next, I will explain
The maṇḍala of the King of the Seven.
In order to attain the power of flight,
One should perfect Paramāśva.
“He has two arms, one face,
A dark-colored body, and is terrifying.
He stands on a sun disk
And is beautiful, with face of a horse.
His right hand holds bean pods in a fist,
And his left, a skull cup.
oṁ phuṁ phuṁ phuṁ hi hi hi |
“The adept should recite this mantra 
For the renowned Paramāśva.
“In the east, visualize Vaḍavā,
In the south Turaṅgamā,
In the west Saptarājñī,
And in the northern space, Paramāśvā.
“One should visualize their faces and arms
To be like those of the central deity.
The request for them to arrive
Resounds everywhere through this mantra. 
“In each of the corners one should place 
Bamboo and reed flutes, a lute, drum, and tabor.
“Gokarṇa, Hastikarṇa, Sumukha, Durmukha,
Muśāla, Paraśu, Aṅkuśa, and Pāśa
Should be continuously visualized in the four doors,
Engaged in dance and other dramatic acts.
Green shoots should be visualized in their left hands
And, similarly, their emblems in their right.
The mantra of Paramāśva
Is the same as Vajrapātāla’s.
By cultivating the practice of Paramāśva
One becomes the space of the three worlds.
This was the thirteenth chapter, “Identifying the Siddhis,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 14: The Practice of Mañjuvajra
“This is the supreme rite for the measuring cord:
oṁ akāro mukhaṃ sarva­dharmāṇām ādyanutpannatvāt oṁ āḥ hūṁ phaṭ svāhā |
“One should visualize themselves as glorious Yamāntaka 
And the disciple as Vairocana.
Then, while meditatively composed, 
Set the supreme, preeminent wisdom cord.
“This is the supreme samaya of the great maṇḍala:oṁ āḥ hūṁ |
“The adept should prepare a cord
That is smeared with the five cow products 
And is twice as long as the maṇḍala,
With the doors being a twentieth of that.
“This is the rite for the great vajra request:
“O great master, a buddha,
Lord of the Dharma assembly,
Grant me the true samaya!
Grant me the bodhicitta!
“This is the rite for the erecting the great site. Once the earth goddess has been summoned, one should say:
‘Devi, you bear witness
To the unique conduct
Of all the buddhas, the protectors, 
And to their perfections and levels. 
“Supreme beings should know
The doors to be an eighth of the maṇḍala,
Excluding the great main hall,
Which is pleasing and lavishly decorated.
“The crests should be known to be like the doors,
As are the celestial moldings,
Which are affixed with vajra apsarases
Who are singing, playing instruments, and dancing.
“The altar is half the measure of the doors,
As are the cheek moldings and the sides.
It also has long and short pearl strands,
Moons, suns, flower garlands,
Cloth hangings, and ribbons.
“The colored ground is half of that
And the base line is outside the grounds.
“Now, the great essence:
“One’s own circle should be set
And one should embrace their mudrā.
The wisdom enters the samaya—
Thus should the maṇḍala be established.
“The east should be colored bright white,
The south, yellow,
The western portion, red,
The north green in color,
And the central space like the light of a sapphire. 
“Then the implements should be placed
In accordance with the prescribed rite.
The implements are always sky-like
And are always drawn in this way.
In the center one should draw a vajra,
In the east, a wheel should be drawn,
And so forth for the other directions.
The implements should always resemble the main face.
Now, for the ladle:
“One should fashion a stick
That it is one cubit in length.
Its end should be rounded
And measure four finger-widths around.
The bottom should be two finger-widths deep
And fashioned with a spout half a finger-width wide.
“A spoon, shaped like a lotus petal, 
With a bowl one thumb-width high
And one finger-width deep,
Is praised in this tantra. 
“People who have not entered the maṇḍala,
Who have committed the five acts with immediate retribution,
Who have taken a life, 
Who eat fish and other meats,
“Who indulge in wine,
Who uphold the ways of nihilists, 
Who have not been initiated,
Who wander about begging,
“And who delight in country ways,
And yet devote themselves to Yamāri’s tantra,
Will doubtlessly become accomplished,
According to words of the Dark One.”
Once all the buddhas and the bodhisattvas, headed by Maitreya, heard this vajra statement, they fell silent and remained seated.
This is the rite for vajra entry: 
“The four circles should be formed
From the great seed syllables of the four elements.
By connecting them to the four places,
One can move through the sky.
“The syllable yaṁ is on the bottom of the feet, the syllable raṃ is at the navel, the syllable laṃ is at the heart, and the syllable vaṃ is at the head.
“The wind maṇḍala is bow-shaped, pitch-black,
The form of fierce and fearsome wind.
The fire maṇḍala is triangular, blazes like fire,
And appears as red as the sun.
“The earth maṇḍala is a bright yellow square,
The imperishable base of the vajra ground.
It should be imagined as the very earth 
Upon which stand Sumeru and its mountain range.
“The water maṇḍala is white, round, intensely cold,
And carries water like a bank of clouds. 
It is like the ocean filled by a thousand streams
And cool like snow-covered mountains.
“One should visualize the vajra-holding disciple,
Using the method of these four places,
And with Amitābha in their mouth,
And then bring them quickly into the maṇḍala. 
“This is the rite for the request:
“ ‘Vajradharma, Great Protector,
Amitābha, Great Bliss!
Please speak, you who have great desire for the Dharma.
I ask about virtue and nonvirtue.’
“Great disciples rise up
From just one cubit,
Up to one thousand cubits.
This is based on the rite of entering.
“Now I will explain
The features of the plaster image.
The vow holder should take wet clay
And perform the mantra recitation.
“Beans, milk, meat, and molasses,
Should be mixed with tamarind and the like,
With oil, neem leaves,
As well as nāḍīka seeds.
“One should first apply a white layer
And then decorate it with other colors.
Using chalk and red ocher
Results in a color similar to lac.
“Turmeric and indigo
Similarly yield dark green.
Blue mixed with indigo,
Or with eye black, yields black.
“Mixing pale yellow with realgar, 
Or vermillion, yields red. 
Add to that a drop of bilva,
But just a little, not too much.
“If one adds too much it turns black,
If too little, it becomes grey.
The image can be either wrathful or peaceful.
The characteristics of both will now be described.
“The peaceful is described as playful,
The wrathful as rotund and short.
Its nose should measure four finger-widths.
Its forehead, chin, jaws, throat, and neck,
Should also be four finger-widths.
The image should be twenty-four cubits and twenty finger-widths tall.
Its hands, feet and mouth are all the same size.
And its eyes are a single thumb width.
“Its ears are described as two finger-widths
And its two testicles each four.
Its lips together are two finger-widths
And its navel one finger-width.
“Its face is one of third its body
And has no neck.
Its crown of matted hair is the length of its face
And bears a crown that is six finger-widths.
“Now I will explain
The practice of Ekajaṭā.
One who seeks the siddhis of a yakṣiṇī
Should train in Ekajaṭā.
“One should visualize her in the maṇḍala’s center,
With one face and two arms,
Holding a knife and a skull cup,
Her body stout and blue.
“Jambhalā should be imagined in the east
And Vasudhārā in the south.
Jalendrā is to be placed in the west 
And Cibikuṇḍalī in the north.
“In the four corners, the southeast first,
One should visualize the four yakṣiṇīs—
Kuntalā, Dehinī, Gehā, and Vasundarī,
And arrange them according to the rite.
“One should then visualize the doors,
With Mudgara and the rest all around.
One should use the same colors
As in the previous maṇḍala.
“Seeing themselves as the maṇḍala deity, bearing emblems,
The adept should then recite her mantra:
oṁ ekajaṭi vasudhāriṇi svāhā |
“Next, I will explain
The practice of Pukkasī.
By merely visualizing her
One is able to harm the three worlds.
“One should imagine her 
As yellow, with four faces and arms,
And riding on a donkey.
She should be visualized holding a bow, 
Noose, hammer, and arrow.
“The mantra to recite is: oṁ pukkasī aṃ |
“Now I will explain
The maṇḍala of Mañjuvajra.
Once Mañjuvajra is accomplished,
Invisibility instantly ensues. 
“He has three faces and six arms,
And is yellow, like the luster of gold.
One should train in this protector with a youthful form 
In order to make oneself invisible.
“Sundarī should be placed in the east
And Keśinī in the south.
Vihvalā should be imagined in the west
And Upakeśinī in the north.
“A sword should be placed in their right hands 
And a wheel and the rest in all the others.
They all have three faces and six arms
And are adorned with various ornaments.
“Arising from the seed syllable maṁ,
They stand in the maṇḍala’s core,
All standing on moon disks
With their left legs extended.
“Mārīcī, Parṇaśabarī,
Vasudhārā, and Cundrikā
Are placed in the four corners, southeast first, 
As a gathering of the essence.
“They are visualized holding aśoka leaves and branches,
As well as the stalks of clusters of grain.
Their bodies are yellow and green,
Yellow again, and white. 
“They all have three faces and six arms,
And are known as the maṇḍala deities.
Mudga and the rest are visualized in the doors.
Thus will one become invisible.
This was the fourteenth chapter, “The Practice of Mañjuvajra,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 15: The Practice of Vajrānaṅga
“Next, I will explain
The practice of the noble Jāṅgulī.
One can walk on water 
Merely by visualizing her.
“Born from the seed syllable phuḥ,
She is yellow, with three faces and six arms.
Mighty in form, she holds a snake in her hand 
And rides a peacock as her mount.
“One should place Māyūrī in the east,
Bhṛkuṭī in the south,
Parṇaśabarī in the west, 
And Vajraśṛṅkhalā in the north.
“They should be visualized with peacock feathers, 
Water pitchers, sprigs, and vajra chains. 
Their colors are yellow, red,
Green, and blue, respectively.
“The adept should visualize in this way
And then recite her mantra:
oṁ phuḥ jaḥ |
“Mudgara and the others are placed in the doors,
And Puṣpā and the others in the corners.
Through the yoga of Jāṅgulī,
One will always walk on water.
“Next, I will explain
The practice of Kurukullā.
Merely by visualizing her
One can summon a female nāga.
“She is red, has four faces,
And is arrayed with eight arms.
She arises from the syllable hrīḥ
And is capable of summoning nāgas.
“Nāgas from the eight families, Ananta first,
Should be placed in her eight hands.
The vow holder should imagine her graceful body
To be beautifully adorned with snakes.
“The mantra is:
oṁ kurukulle hrīḥ phuḥ svāhā |
“Now I will relate the secret,
In brief, not extensively.
Merely knowing it enables one
To summon Apsarases.
“One should visualize Vajrānaṅga
With two arms and one face,
And an arrow and a bow in hand.
His mighty body is yellow in color.
“Rati should be visualized in the east,
Madanasundarī in the south,
Kāmadevī in the west,
And Madanotsukā in the north.
“All of these love goddesses
Should be imagined holding a bow and arrow
And visualized as yellow,
Red, green, and pink.
“Aniruddha and Uṣāpati
Are always placed in the corners.
Vasanta and Makaraketu
Are said to be in the doors.
“Yama’s slayer should be visualized
On the heads of all the deities
Kandarpa and Darpaka,
Smara, and Bāṇāyudha.
“Vajrānaṅga should be visualized
Standing inside a woman’s lotus.
Arisen from the syllable śīt
He emits light in all directions.
“One should imagine the desired woman 
Trembling, beside herself with anxious desire, 
She has fallen at one’s feet,
Wrapped in a red garment.
“This is the moment to recite the mantra,
Pronouncing the mantra-syllable śīt
Extending from the syllable oṁ,
With svāhā placed at the end.
“If one continuously meditates,
‘May the woman so-and-so be enthralled,’
The yogin will obtain her through desire,
Just as the Dark One declared.”
This was the fifteenth chapter, “The Practice of Vajrānaṅga,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 16: The Practice of Heruka
“Next, I will explain
The practice of the great Heruka,
Knowing which, the yogin
Will quickly be liberated from saṃsāra’s fetters.
“One should visualize him with two arms and one face,
Blue in color, and in the half-dancing posture.
He should be visualized with a vajra in one hand
And a skull cup in the other.
“He has three eyes, his hair flows upward,
And he is adorned with the five mudrās.
He has a khaṭvāṅga at his left side
And his feet are adorned with anklets.
“He has emerged from the syllable hūṁ
And should always be placed standing on a preta.
The five skulls on his head
Are related to the five buddhas.
One should visualize Akṣobhya on their crown— 
This is how one visualizes the one called Heruka.
“In the east is Dharmacakrā,
In the south, Buddhabodhi,
In the west, Sarvakāmalatā,
And in the north, the one resembling Heruka.
“They are adorned with every ornament
And are arrayed in their respective colors.
They are alluring, stand on pretas, 
And destroy all delusion.
“They are to be drawn in the midst of a Dharma wheel, 
An aśvattha sprig, and a wish-fulfilling tree. 
A vajra should be visualized
In the goddesses’ right hands.
They should be visualized on a circular disk,
With a human skull in their other hand.
“The enchanting Locanā, Māmakī, Tārā, and Pāṇḍarā
Are in the four corners, beginning in the southeast,
And Yamāntaka is in the outer circle.
One should visualize Prajñāntaka, Hayagrīva, Sarvakuṇḍali, 
And the maṇḍala’s door guardians as well, 
Imagining them following the proper rite.”
This was the sixteenth chapter, “The Practice of Heruka,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 17: Bodhicitta
“After visualizing the five aspects,
The adept should visualize an image of the Buddha.
After visualizing the image of the Buddha,
They should visualize the wheel bearer.
“The performance of the four songs
Initiates the emergence of the wheel bearer.
Cārcikā and the others offer songs
In the ṣāḍava and other scales.
“ ‘Rise, lord of compassionate wrath,
And remove the ignorance of the three worlds!’
“ ‘I beg you, Lord, do not linger but rise, 
Be victorious over the māras!’
“ ‘World protector, how can you dwell in emptiness?
Arise, Lord, through the power of the world’s merit!’
“ ‘Why do you remain in emptiness? 
The world moves toward the nature of awakening.’
“Bodhicitta should be reached,
Like the trajectory of a shooting star.
The vajra holder himself has melted,
Through a mind suffused with compassion.
“First one should cultivate yoga,
Second, anuyoga,
Third, atiyoga,
And fourth, mahāyoga.
“The completion of Vajrasattva
Is what is meant by yoga.
The melting of the deity’s body
Is known as anuyoga.
“The completion of the entire circle
Is called atiyoga.
“The empowerment of the divine eyes,
As well as body, speech, and mind,
Entry into the wisdom circle,
The tasting of the nectar,
And the extensive offerings and praises,
Are known as mahāyoga.
“The teacher should not be disparaged.
The sugatas commands should not be transgressed.
Likewise, one should not grow angry with their brethren
And should not reveal their faults.
“One should never abandon bodhicitta
Or dishonor their own or others’ Dharma.
One should never relinquish
Their love for other beings.
“One should not teach secrets 
To those who are not yet ripened. 
One should not revile their own aggregates
Nor disparage village ways.
“One should always avoid those enamored with wickedness
And not take the measure of meritorious acts.
One should not deceive beings who have faith
And should always honor their samaya.
“Deprecating women, the nature of wisdom,
Is considered an offence.
Yogins should never go out for alms,
Nor should they forsake their yoga.
“They should always and continuously recite mantra
And always honor their samayas.
If, in a moment of carelessness,
One damages the samaya with their teacher,
They should draw a maṇḍala 
And confess their faults to the sugatas. 
“The compassionate should, without rationalization,
Faithfully guard the samaya with their master.
They should continuously venerate their master
Through great effort in meditation, recitation, and the rest,
All with a mind that has relinquished its faults.
“The vow holder should ripen the disciple
Who is steadfast, disciplined, singularly compassionate,
Who endures with faith and determination,
Who is devoted to their master,
And is faithfully devoted to Yamāri.” 
Once all the blessed tathāgatas heard the words of the vajra bearer, the embodiment of supremely great bliss, they fell silent. Then, they spoke this praise:
“Just as the great skull cup is the ultimate expression of the vow,
The yantras are the ultimate expression of Yamāri’s tantras.
The ultimate expression of the tantras is the assembly. 
Nothing else has been or will be. 
“How amazing, the Dharma of great peace!
How amazing, the wrathful terrifier!
How amazing, the supreme nirvāṇa!
How amazing, the pacifier of saṃsāra!
“How amazing! This is truly marvelous!
Faults become qualities.
There is no awakening, no realization,
No being and no becoming.
“There are no elements and no consciousness,
All is equal to the element of space.
Devoid of self, just like the sky, 
This Dharma is great bliss. 
“There is no earth, no water,
No fire, no wind, and no space.
Once generated and consecrated,
Through the method of the vajra-being, 
All that exists is said to not exist 
And no claim is made about the nonexistent.
“Through the connection between yoga and being a yogin,
There is neither cessation nor permanence.
There are no arms and no colors.
Beginning, middle, and end are abandoned,
And all existents disappear—
This is the quality of supreme joy.”
Then, the blessed great Carcikā and the others spoke this praise:
“Unrelated to both merit and evil,
Supreme joy is the stainless, pure protector.
It is the singular great treasure of thusness,
A protector as the universal compassionate mind.
“All phenomena have the nature of great bliss.
Supreme joy is its intrinsic nature.
It has no form, merit, or evil,
Nor does it undergo arising and ceasing.”
This was the seventeenth chapter, “Bodhicitta,” from The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of All Tathāgatas.
Chapter 18
“Now I will relate the history of this tantra. 
“When the Bhagavat was about to attain awakening, a great army of māras approached, displaying fearsome terrors in order to interfere with the awakening of the blessed Great Sage. At that time, the Bhagavat entered the meditative absorption called victory over great māras and emanated the wrathful great Yamāri from the vajras of his body, speech, and mind. Once emanated, the King of Sages gave this command to Vajrapāṇi:
“Vajrapāṇi! Assume this form of the wrathful Yamāri and destroy, bind, and kill the māras, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, and devas!”
The great Lord of the Guhyakas, the head of the vajra family, and father of Nalakūbera, then said:
“At that time, I heard the words of the Bhagavat, instantly grasped and understood the meaning, compiled it, and took it to heart.”
This was the eighteenth chapter of the Tantra of Black Yamāri, which was extracted from the King of Tantras in seven hundred thousand lines and revealed in the land of Oḍḍiyāna, and which produces all siddhis.
The Tantra of Black Yamāri, the Body, Speech, and Mind of all Tathāgatas, is complete.
This was translated, edited, and finalized by the great Indian preceptor Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna and the Tibetan translator, the monk Tsültrim Gyalwa. Later, the translation was revised by the monk and translator Darma Drak, and then again by the monk Dorjé Drak.