{{translation:{id:UT22084-036-009,key:toh44-38,version:1.0.5,style:plain}}}
Chapter on the Dwellings of Bodhisattvas
 Then the bodhisattva King of Mind spoke again to those bodhisattvas, “O children of the Victorious One! In the east, there is a mountain called Appearance of a Sage, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Vajraśrī teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of three hundred bodhisattvas. 
“O children of the Victorious One! In the south, there is a mountain called Heap of Glory, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.  In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Dharmamati teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of five hundred bodhisattvas.
“O children of the Victorious One! In the west, there is a mountain called Possessed of Vajra Radiance, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Walks with the Gait of a Lion teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of three hundred bodhisattvas.
“O children of the Victorious One! In the north, there is a mountain called Heap of Incense, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Gandhahastin teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of three thousand bodhisattvas. 
“O children of the Victorious One! In the east, there is a mountain called Mountain of Meadows, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Mañjuśrī teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of ten thousand bodhisattvas.
“O children of the Victorious One! In the northeastern direction, there is a mountain called Vajra Mountain, Site of Four Great Oceans, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Dharmodgata teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of twelve hundred bodhisattvas.
“O children of the Victorious One! In the southeastern direction, there is a mountain called Stūpa, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Divine Aggregates teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of one thousand bodhisattvas. 
“O children of the Victorious One! In the southwestern direction, there is a mountain called Jyotiṣprabha, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Bhadraśrī teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of three thousand bodhisattvas.
“O children of the Victorious One! In the northwestern direction, there is a mountain called Gandhamādana, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. In this dwelling place a bodhisattva called Radiating Luminous Incense teaches Dharma surrounded by a retinue of five thousand bodhisattvas.
“O children of the Victorious One! In the great ocean, there is a place called Good Cave, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“O children of the Victorious One! To the south of Vaiśālī, there is a place called Stable Roots, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Pāṭaliputra, there is a place called Golden Park of the Saṅgha, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Mathurā, there is a place called Satisfying Cave, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Relinquishing the Vase, there is a place called Dharma Seat, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Perfect Virtue, there is a place called Mucilinda Cave, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Vatsa, there is a place, established by nāgas, called Añcala, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided. 
“In a land called Kamboja, there is a place called Exalted by Love, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called China, there is a place called Nārāyaṇa Cave, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Khaśa, there is a mountain called Gośṛṇga, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Kashmir, there is a place called Sudarśaka, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Increasing Joy, there is a place called Sthavira Cave, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In a land called Jalandhar, there is a place called Teaching with Hands Folded, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.
“In the vicinity of the land called Gandhara, there is a place called Cave of Provisions, where bodhisattvas in the past have resided.”
This concludes “The Dwellings of Bodhisattvas,” the thirty-eighth chapter of the extensive sūtra, “The Ornaments of the Buddhas.”