{{translation:{key:toh513,version:1.0.12,style:plain}}}
The Noble Dhāraṇī “Endowed with the Attributes of All the Buddhas”
 Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling on the bank of the great river Gaṅgā together with the four guardians of the world. 
At that time, the Blessed One said to those four great kings including Vaiśravaṇa,  “All men, women, young boys, and girls have four great fears. Which four? These four: aging, sickness, decrepitude, and death. Among them, the single greatest fear is of the Lord of Death, in that death is cruel, cannot be remedied, and is always in close pursuit. Great kings, I will now pronounce the remedy for this single great fear.”
The four great kings replied, “Blessed One, it is our great fortune that the Blessed One will care for all beings by bestowing life for their sake!”
The Blessed One was seated facing east, and with the sound of a finger snap he invoked all the tathāgatas, saying, “May all the tathāgatas, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas, who have fully awakened to unsurpassable and perfect awakening out of love for sentient beings, assist me! Having been blessed here by all the buddhas, I will avert the untimely deaths of all beings! I will turn a second wheel of Dharma that has not been turned before!” 
Likewise, he invoked all the tathāgatas of the south, west, north, above, and below, saying, “May all the tathāgatas, the worthy ones, the perfect buddhas, who have fully awakened to unsurpassable and perfect awakening out of love for sentient beings, assist me!”
Likewise, in every intermediate direction he spoke these words, so that beings’  life spans, physical strengths, and complexions would be perfect, and so that fear of an untimely death would not arise, saying, “May all the buddhas assist me!”
Then there appeared before the Buddha’s eyes as many world systems as there are elements of earth throughout the ten directions, filled with blessed buddhas like a sesame pod. These tathāgatas pledged their assistance, and all spoke the following:
tadyathā calā calā cale vinati svastike cakrāṅgati praśamantu sarvarogānatre kunaṭe mahākunaṭe care carere hemagiri hemagauri hemaniśunti hemasisi kaurave kauravave hekurare kurare kumati piṣasamaṇe śiṣuvi cale cale vicale mā vilamba humu humu svāhā!
The lords of the guhyakas, as many as there were, from their places beside all those tathāgatas, also spoke, saying “hūṁ hūṁ si si svāhā!” and the tathāgatas vanished from sight.
Then the great king Vaiśravaṇa said, “Blessed One, I, too, with the blessing of the tathāgatas, will act as a guardian, and will avert untimely death! tadyathā śvete śvete lelili!” 
Virūḍhaka also spoke, saying  “mātaṅge mātaṅge mātaṅgini śūmā śūmū!” 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra also spoke, saying “care carere svāhā!” 
Virūpākṣa also spoke, saying “balampipa!”
The Blessed One responded, “Great Kings, when a son or daughter of noble family recites at least once a day, every day, these vidyāmantras seen by all the buddhas, that son or daughter of noble family should be regarded as a teacher.  That son or daughter of noble family will never again be reborn in the three lower realms and will be of benefit to the lives of all beings. Anyone who recites these words once a day for the benefit of all beings, or even reads them, will have no fear of untimely death. Their bodies will be free of disease. At no time will they drown, or be killed by fire, by weapons, by poison, or by lightning. It should be known that wherever a child of the victors recites these vidyāmantras, he or she will secure the attention of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Anyone who writes this down, or has it written down, will be serving the blessed buddhas with every respect and honor. If one wonders why this is, it is because the tathāgatas have declared that serving sentient beings is serving the buddhas. If someone, having written this, affixes it to a limb, all their limbs will be protected.”
When the Blessed One had spoken thus, the four great kings, the entire retinue, and the world with all its gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
This concludes the Noble Dhāraṇī Endowed with the Attributes of All the Buddhas.
 This was translated and edited by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Dānaśīla and the translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé. It was then revised according to the new lexicon and finalized.