{{translation:{key:toh598,version:1.4.8,style:plain}}}
Crown Victory of All Tathāgatas:
A Ritual Manual for The Uṣṇīṣavijayā Dhāraṇī
 Homage to Uṣṇīṣavijayā.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was residing in Sukhāvatī. The blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfectly awakened Buddha Amitāyus was staying joyfully in the grove of the excellent secret palace, Dharma Proclamation. He said to the bodhisattva, the great being, Noble Avalokiteśvara, “Child of noble family, there are beings who suffer, are afflicted with diseases, and have short lifespans. To help them, one should uphold this dhāraṇī called the crown victory of all tathāgatas and teach it extensively to others for the sake of long life.”
Then the bodhisattva, the great being, Avalokiteśvara arose from his seat, joined his palms,  and said to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, please teach the dhāraṇī called the crown victory of all tathāgatas. Well-Gone One, please teach it!”
Then the Blessed One looked upon the circle of his perfect retinue, entered the samādhi called the splendor beheld everywhere, and pronounced this dhāraṇī called the crown victory of all tathāgatas:
“oṁ namo bhagavate sarvatrailokyaprativiśiṣṭāya buddhāya te namaḥ |  tadyathā | oṁ bhrūṁ bhrūṁ bhrūṁ | śodhaya śodhaya | viśodhaya viśodhaya | asamasamantāvabhāsaspharaṇagatigaganasvabhāvaviśuddhe | abhiṣiñcantu māṃ sarvatathāgatāḥ sugatavaravacanāmṛtābhiṣekair mahāmudrāmantrapadaiḥ | oṁ āhara āhara mama āyuḥsandhāraṇi | śodhaya śodhaya | viśodhaya viśodhaya | gaganasvabhāvaviśuddhe | uṣṇīṣavijāyapariśuddhe | sahasraraśmisañcodite | sarvatathāgatāvalokini | ṣaṭpāramitāparipūraṇi | sarvatathāgatamāte | daśabhūmipratiṣṭḥite | sarvatathāgatahṛdayādhiṣṭhānādhiṣṭḥite | oṁ mudre mudre mahāmudre | vajrakāyasaṃhatanapariśuddhe | sarvakarmāvaraṇaviśuddhe | pratinivartaya mamāyurviśuddhe | sarvatathāgatasamayādhiṣṭhānādhiṣṭhite | oṁ muni muni mahāmuni | vimuni vimuni mahāvimuni | mati mati mahāmati | mamati mamati mahāmamati| sumati sumati mahāsumati | tathatābhūtakoṭipariśuddhe | visphuṭabuddhiśuddhe | oṁ he he | jaya jaya | vijaya vijaya | smara smara | sphara sphara | sphāraya sphāraya | sarvabuddhādhiṣṭhānādhiṣṭhite | oṁ śuddhe śuddhe | buddhe buddhe | vajre vajre mahāvajre | suvajre | vajragarbhe | jayagarbhe | vijayagarbhe | vajrajvālagarbhe | vajrodbhave | vajrasambhave | vajre | vajrini | vajram bhavatu me śarīraṃ sarvasatvānāñ ca kāyapariśuddhir bhavatu | me sadā sarvagatipariśuddhiś ca | sarvatathāgatāś ca māṃ samāśvāsayantu | oṁ budhya budhya | siddhya siddhya | bodhaya bodhaya | vibodhaya vibodhaya | mocaya mocaya | vimocaya vimocaya |  śodhaya śodhaya | viśodhaya viśodhaya | samantān mocaya mocaya | samantaraśmipariśuddhe | sarvatathāgatahṛdayādhiṣṭhānādhiṣṭhite | oṁ mudre mudre mahāmudre | mahāmudrāmantrapadaiḥ svāhā.
“Child of noble family, this dhāraṇī of the crown victory of all tathāgatas is the destroyer of the great cudgel of death, the purifier, the destroyer of evil deeds. Anyone who wants a long lifespan should read this dhāraṇī aloud following the rite that I will explain here. 
“Smear a wide clearing on the ground with earth and substances derived from a cow. Sprinkle it with saffron-infused water. Adorn it with a canopy above, and let that hang down. At the center draw an elaborately ornamented eight-spoked wheel with white powder. At the center of that is Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Natural Essence. Then, install these tathāgatas on each of the spokes of the wheel in order, starting in the east: Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Sky-Like Feast Gathering, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Essence of the Earth, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Essence of Jewels, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from Nutritious Food, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Boundless Essence, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Essence of Splendor, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Sound of a Drum, and Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from a Breeze. 
“Draw a sixteen-petaled lotus directly on the outside of this and install, on each petal and in proper order, the following tathāgatas arisen from the sixteen drops: Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from Inner Emptiness, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from Outer Emptiness, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from Outer and Inner Emptiness, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of Emptiness, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from Ultimate Emptiness, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of Compounded Phenomena, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of Uncompounded Phenomena, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from Beginningless and Endless Emptiness,  Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of Nonrejection, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Natural Emptiness, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of All Phenomena, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of Own-Characteristics, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of the Unobserved, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of Nonentities, Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of Own-Essence, and Uṣṇīṣa Arisen from the Emptiness of Own-Essence of Nonentities. 
“Make a maṇḍala with seats for the tathāgatas and offer them whatever flowers are in season. Set up a throne in the upper half of it and place upon it a caitya of Vairocanagarbha in a water vessel. Also place there a piece of paper or a leaf with the syllables of the mantra and the practitioner’s name on it and a vase filled with water. 
“Place four vases in the four directions surrounding the lotus and decorate them with silken tassels, parasols, and pennants. To the east place the goddess Uṣṇīṣavijayā Who Conquers All Obstacles. In the south is the goddess Uṣṇīṣavijayā Who Conquers Death. In the west is the goddess Uṣṇīṣavijayā Who Conquers Afflictive Emotions. In the north is the goddess Uṣṇīṣavijayā Who Conquers Illnesses of the Aggregates. In the southeast is Life-Granting Vajra Garland. In the southwest is Mahāmāyā. In the northwest is Golden Light. In the northeast is Life-Granting Golden Garland. 
“Fill four vessels with perfumed water, hang flower garlands on them, and place them there also. Around these draw three images with colored powder. In the first line arrange one thousand molded images made with wet clay that is free from hairs and the like. If one thousand are not possible, it is essential to set out at least one hundred. Make offerings in the four directions with utmost honor and respect. 
“A dharmabhāṇaka who maintains a vow  not to speak any other words should recite this dhāraṇī. Each time they recite the dhāraṇī, they should make offerings to the head of the caitya and consecrate it. After reciting one thousand times, they should wave their hand at the head of the central caitya and make offerings of flowers, incense, lamps, scented water, food offerings, and so forth. One thousand of each of these offerings should be arranged in lines around the caitya. Make sure that the line of lamps burns without being blown out by the wind for as long as it takes to finish the rite, and maintain equipoise and strict purity. 
“If the rite is performed in this way, a lifespan of seven days will thereby become seven years, a lifespan of seven years will become a supremely long life, one will be free from illness and live for a hundred years, and one will never meet an untimely death. If one follows some other procedure to perform the rite, it will not work.” 
This was the first chapter.
This ritual manual was translated in Glorious Tharpa Ling Temple by the learned Lotsāwa Neten Palkyi Nyima Gyaltsen Sangpo following the instructions of the genuine spiritual friend, the sublime monk and unparalleled teacher of the Vinaya Piṭaka, Ne’u Khenpo.