{{translation:{key:toh590,version:1.0.6,style:plain}}}
The Noble Invincible Great Queen of Spells for Averting
Sitātapatrā Born from the Uṣṇīṣa of All Tathāgatas
 Homage to the Three Jewels!Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling in Excellent Dharma, the assembly hall of the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, together with a great assembly of monks, a great assembly of bodhisattvas, and Śakra, the lord of the gods. The Blessed One sat down on a seat arranged for him and entered the samādhi called uṣṇīṣa gaze. As soon as he entered this samādhi, the words of this mantra formula issued from the center of the Blessed One’s uṣṇīṣa:
“namo bhagavate uṣṇīṣāya śuddhe viraje vimale svāhā.
“Homage to the blessed, unimpeded Uṣṇīṣa.
Homage to the Buddha.
Homage to the Dharma.
Homage to the Saṅgha.
Homage to the seventy million completely perfect buddhas.
Homage to the buddhas and bodhisattvas, headed by Maitreya, and the assembly of śrāvakas.
“Homage to the arhats of this world.
Homage to the stream enterers.
Homage to the once-returners.
Homage to the non-returners.
Homage to those who have gone rightly in this world.
Homage to those who have acted rightly. 
“Homage to the divine ṛṣis.
Homage to the ṛṣis who have become vidyādharas.
Homage to the ṛṣis who have attained the state of a vidyādhara, wield the weapon of curses, and have the ability to benefit through curses.
“Homage to the divine Brahmā.
Homage to Indra.
Homage to the blessed Rudra together with Umāpati.
Homage to Varuṇa.
Homage to the blessed Nārāyaṇa, worshiped by the five great mudrās.
Homage to the blessed Nandikeśvara Mahākāla, destroyer of Tripura, who prefers to reside in the great charnel ground of Kashmir and is worshiped by hordes of mātṛs.
“Homage to the Blessed One of the tathāgata family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the lotus family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the vajra family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the jewel family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the kingly family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the action family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the gem family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the youthful family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the elephant family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the ignorance family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the desire family.
“Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Dṛḍha­śūraraṇasena­praharaṇa­rāja.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Akṣobhya.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Vajradharasāgaragarjin. 
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Bhaiṣajya­guru­vaiḍūrya­prabha­rāja. 
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy completely perfect Buddha Amoghasiddhi.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Supuṣpita­śālendra­rāja.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Padmottararāja.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha ﻿Vipaśyin.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śikhin.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Viśvabhū.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Krakucchanda.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Kanakamuni.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Kāśyapa.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Ratnacandra.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Ratnaketurāja. 
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Samantabhadra.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Vairocana. 
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Vikasita­kamalotpala­gandha­ketu­rāja.
“Having paid homage to these blessed ones, I will teach the invincible queen of vidyās for averting, Sitātapatrā born from the uṣṇīṣa of all tathāgatas. It pacifies strife, discord, quarrels, and disputes; repels all bhūtas and grahas; disrupts all opposing spells; protects from untimely death; frees beings from all bondage; ends all malice and nightmares; destroys grahas who are yakṣas and rākṣasas; destroys the eighty-four thousand types of grahas; appeases the twenty-eight lunar mansions; repels all enemies; destroys the eight great celestial bodies; ends all violence, malice, and nightmares; protects from poisons, weapons, fire, and water; liberates from all fear of the bad rebirths; and protects from the eight types of untimely death.
“She is invincible and greatly terrifying,
Immensely powerful and rich in splendor.
Intensely fierce and bright white, 
Powerfully bright and immensely powerful, 
Possessing a great garland and blazing intensely,
She is the great Pāṇḍaravāsinī.
“She is noble Tārā and Bhṛkuṭī. 
Renowned as the victorious Vajramālā,
She appears as a lotus and is marked with a vajra.
She is Aparājitā and Mālā.
“She is the alluring Vajratuṇḍī.
Worshiped by the peaceful gods,
Of gentle appearance and bright white,
She is the blazing Pāṇḍaravāsinī.
“She is noble Tārā, greatly powerful. 
Deathless, she is Vajraśṛṅkhalā. 
She is Vajrakaumārī, scion of her family,
And the vajra-vidyā Kāñcanamālikā with vajra in hand.
“She is Kusumbharatnā,
The light of Vairocana’s family.
She is the uṣṇīṣa of the tathāgata family, 
Vijṛmbhamānikā, and Vajrā.
“She is Locanā, who shines like gold.
She is Vajratuṇḍī,
Śvetā and Kamalākṣī,
And the glorious Buddhalocanā.
“Likewise she is Vajraprabhā and Candrā,
And so too is she Vajradharā, 
Vajramālā, the goddess Mahāmāyā, 
And Kanakaprabhā. 
“She is Sulocanā, Śvetā,
And The One with Lotus Eyes.
She is tamed, her mind at peace.
She knows the innate qualities and shines like the moon.
“May this host of great mudrās with their hordes of mātṛs please protect me, my community, and all beings!
oṁ ṛṣigaṇapraśaste sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣasitātapatre hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | jambhani hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | stambhani hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | mohanakarī hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | parividyāsambhakṣaṇakarī hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | sarvavidyācchedanakarī hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | sarvaduṣṭānāṃ stambhanakarī hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | sarvayakṣarākṣasagrahāṇām vidhvaṃsanakarī hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | caturāśītīnāṃ grahasahasrāṇām vidhvaṃsanakarī hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | aṣṭāviṃsatīnāṃ nakṣatrāṇāṃ prasādanakarī hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | aṣṭānāṃ mahāgrahāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsanakarī hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | rakṣa rakṣa māṃ sarvasattvāṃś ca |
“Blessed Sitātapatrā, born from the uṣṇīṣa of all tathāgatas, Vajroṣṇīṣā, great averting goddess, great goddess with a thousand arms, great goddess with a thousand heads, great goddess with a trillion eyes and indestructible blazing features, great exalted vajra goddess who rules over the maṇḍala of the three realms of existence!
“Oṁ! Grant auspiciousness to me and all beings in the face of danger from rulers, thieves, fire, water, poison, weapons, enemies, opposing armies, famines, foes, thunderbolts,  untimely death, earthquakes, falling meteors, legal punishments, ferocious beasts, nāgas, lightning, scorching sand, suparṇas, and all epidemics, calamities, infectious diseases, and mental disturbances. 
“Grant auspiciousness in the face of danger from grahas and from grahas who are devas, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, maruts, kinnaras, mahoragas, human and nonhuman beings, bhūtas, pretas, piśācas, kumbhāṇḍas,  pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, skandas, unmādas, chāyās, apasmāras, ostārakas, ḍākinīs, kaṭavāsinīs, revatīs, kaṇṭakamālinīs, kaṭakamālinīs, śakunis, mātṛnandīs, samikās, lambikās, ḍākinīs, kaṭaḍākinīs, and kaṭaṅkaṭamālinīs, as well as all kinds of grahas. 
“Grant auspiciousness in the face of danger from grahas who steal vitality, consume fetuses, drink blood, and consume fat, flesh, grease, and marrow; who consume newborns and steal life; who consume oblations, garlands, fragrances, flowers, incense, fruits, grains, and burnt offerings; who consume pus, feces, urine, saliva, snot,  mucus, vomit, chewed food, and filth; who drink sewage; and who steal possessions and capture people’s minds.
“I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra all these dangers and all the spells of grahas!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of mendicants!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of ḍākas and ḍākinīs!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Brahmā!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Śakra! 
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Nārāyaṇa!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Mahāpaśupati and Rudra!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Mahākāla!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of the hordes of mātṛs!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of kāpālikas!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of the śabaras!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of the pukkasas!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of the ulkāmukhas!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Vajrakaumārī!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Yamāri!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Yama’s henchmen!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of cruel nāgas!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of fire rites!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of vināyakas! 
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Kumāra!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of the Four Great Kings!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of the Four Bhaginīs!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of the true garuḍa!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Jayakara, Madhukara, and Siddhikarasarvārthasādhana!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Bhṛṅgiriṭi, Nandikeśvara, Kārttikeya, Candra, and Sūrya, along with Gaṇapati!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of naked ascetics!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of arhats!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Avalokiteśvara!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of those devoid of passion!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of Vajrapāṇi, lord of the guhyakas! 
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells used in various contexts!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells used by the one who made it!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of shaven-headed ascetics!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of dūtas, dūtīs, ceṭas, and ceṭīs!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of all sublime ṛṣis!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of the hosts of devas!
I split with the sword and pin down with the vajra the spells of those who wish to do harm! 
“Oṃ! Blessed One, protect! Protect me, my community, and all sentient beings from all fears,  all calamities, infectious diseases, and mental disturbances, all malice and hostility, and all opponents, foes, and those who wish to do harm! 
“We pay homage to you, Sitātapatrā, born from the uṣṇīṣa of all tathāgatas and honored by all buddhas and bodhisattvas. Shining like fire and the sun, you are white and broad.
oṁ jvala jvala | dhaka dhaka | khāda khāda | dara dara | vidara vidara | chinda chinda | bhinda bhinda | hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā | sarvaduṣṭān hūṁ drūṃ | sarvadurlaṅghitebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvaduśchāyebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvadurlikhitebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvadigbhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvadurbhuktebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvadūtebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvāvadhūtebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvaduṣkṛtebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvaduḥprekṣitebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvajvarebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvāpasmārebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvostārekebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvaḍākinībhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvarevatībhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvakaṭavāsinībhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvajāmakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvaśakunībhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvamātṛnandikebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvagarebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvaviṣebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvayogebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvālaṃbakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvabhayebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvopadravebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvopasargopāyasebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvottrāsebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva vyādhibhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvaśramaṇebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvagrahebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvatīrthikebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvapratyarthikebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvapātakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvonmādebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvacchayebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvavidyādharebhyaḥ phaṭ | jayakaramadhukarasiddhikarasarvārthasādhakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvavidyācāryebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvavidyārājebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvasādhakebhyo vidyācāryebhyaḥ phaṭ | caturbhyo bhaginībhyaḥ phaṭ | vajrakaumārīye vidyārājñīye phaṭ | sarvavighnavināyakānāṃ phaṭ |  varadāya phaṭ | paravidrāvaṇakarāya phaṭ | sarvāsurebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvagaruḍebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvamahoragebhyaḥ phaṭ |  sarvamanuṣyāmanuṣyebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvamarutebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvapisācebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvakumbhāṇḍebhyaḥ phaṭ | vajraśṛṅkhalāya mahāpratyaṅgirābhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvopasargebhyaḥ phaṭ | mahāpratyaṅgirebhyaḥ phaṭ | chinda chinda phaṭ | bhinda bhinda phaṭ | hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ svāhā | he he phaṭ | ho ho phaṭ | amoghāya phaṭ | apratihatāya phaṭ | varapradāya phaṭ | asuravidrāvaṇakarāya phaṭ | sarvadevebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvanāgebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvayakṣebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvarākṣasebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvagandharvebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvakinnarebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvapretebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvabhūtebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvakumbhāṇḍebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvapūtanebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvakaṭapūtanebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvaskandebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvonmādabhyaḥ phaṭ | vajraśṛṅkhalāya mahāpratyaṅgirārājāya phaṭ | kālāya phaṭ | mahākālāya phaṭ | mātṛgaṇāya phaṭ | mahāmātṛgaṇanamaskṛtāya phaṭ | vaiṣṇavīye phaṭ | māheśvarīye phaṭ | brahmaṇīye phaṭ | agnīye phaṭ | mahākālīye phaṭ | kāladaṇḍiye phaṭ | aindrīye phaṭ | raudrīye phaṭ | cāmuṇḍīye phaṭ | vārāhīye phaṭ | mahāvārāhīye phaṭ | rātrīye phaṭ | kālarātrīye phaṭ | yamadaṇḍīye phaṭ | kāpālīye phaṭ | mahākāpālīye phaṭ | kaumārīye phaṭ | yāmīye phaṭ | vāyave phaṭ | kauberāye phaṭ | nairṛtīye phaṭ | vāruṇīye phaṭ | mārutīye phaṭ | mahāmārutīye phaṭ | saumyāye phaṭ | aiśānīye phaṭ | pukkasīye phaṭ | atharvaṇīye phaṭ | śabarīye phaṭ | kṛṣṇaśabarīye phaṭ | yamadūtīye phaṭ | niśīdivācarebhyaḥ phaṭ | trisandhyācarebhyaḥ phaṭ | dharaṇiye phaṭ | adhimuktikakāśmīramahāśmaśānavāsinīye phaṭ | itibhyaḥ | sarvabhayebhyaḥ | sarvadoṣebhyaḥ phaṭ | oṁ hūṁ sṭoṃ bhandha bhandha sarvaduṣṭān rakṣa rakṣa māṃ sarvasatvāṃśca svāhā |
“Please protect me, my community, and all beings from all those who are wicked and harbor wicked intentions, who are dangerous and harbor dangerous intentions, who are evil and harbor evil intentions, who are angry or harbor angry intentions,  and who are aggressive or harbor aggressive intentions! May we live a hundred years! May we see a hundred autumns!
“For me, my community, and all beings please dispel all grahas and those who would cause harm, including grahas who are yakṣas and those who steal vitality, consume fetuses, and drink blood; who consume fat, flesh, grease, marrow, and newborns; who steal life; who consume oblations, garlands, fragrances, flowers, incense, fruits, grains, and burnt offerings; who steal possessions and capture people’s minds; who consume pus, feces, urine, saliva, snot, mucus, vomit, chewed food, and filth and drink sewage; and who harbor evil minds, hostile minds, and vicious intentions! 
“Dispel grahas who are devas, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas,  kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, maruts, pretas, piśācas, bhūtas, kumbhāṇḍas, pūtanas,  kaṭapūtanas, skandas, unmādas, chāyās, apasmāras, ostārakas, ḍākinīs, revatīs, samikās, kaṇṭakamālinīs, śakunis, mātṛnandīs, pot-like beings, lambikās, kaṭaḍākinīs, and kaṭaṅkaṭamālinīs, as well as all kinds of grahas!
“For me, my community, and all sentient beings please dispel all fevers that last one day, two days, three days, four days, seven days, half a month, or a month; those that occur daily or twice daily or that are momentary, chronic, or irregular; those that are caused by bhūtas, pretas, piśācas, humans, or nonhuman beings; and those that are continuous or that arise from disturbances of wind, bile, phlegm, or their combination. Dispel all illnesses of the brain! 
“For me, my community, and all sentient beings please dispel splitting headaches; loss of appetite; illnesses of the eyes, nose, mouth, throat, or heart; laryngitis; and pain in the ears, teeth, chest, heart, joints, sides, back, stomach, hips, pelvis, anus,  vagina, vulva, thigh, calves, hands, feet, and all the major and minor appendages!
“For me, my community, and all sentient beings please dispel all bhūtas, pretas, vetālas, ḍākinīs; fevers, skin disease, jaundice, itching, pruritus, leprosy, boils, skin irritations, spleen diseases, fistulas, cutaneous infections, scabies, erysipelas, blood boils, emaciation, labored breathing, anxiety, coughs, and fainting; poisonous brews, mineral poisons, poisonous compounds, venoms, and kākhordas; fire, water, pestilence, māras, quarrels, disputes, adversities, and untimely death; and tryambuka flies, tralāṭa flies, scorpions, snakes, mongooses, lions, tigers, bears, jackals, wild yaks, makaras, wolves, thieves, and all other dangers to life!
“With the power of the great averting spell of the vajra uṣṇīṣa Sitātapatrā I bind spells within twelve yojanas or within five hundred yojanas. I bind their energy. I bind all spells. I bind all opposing spells.  I demarcate the boundary. I bind the earth. I bind the ten directions. I bind the sky. I paralyze opposing armies.
tadyathā | oṁ anale anale | acale acale | khakhame khakhame | viṣade viṣade | vīre vīre | vaira vaira | saumye saumye | śānte śānte | dānte dānte | vajradhara bandha bandhani vajrapāṇi phaṭ | oṁ hūṁ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā |  oṁ vajrapāṇi bandha bandhe vajrapāśena sarvaduṣṭavighnavināyakān hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ | hūṁ drūṃ bandha phaṭ | rakṣa rakṣa māṃ sarvasatvāṃśca svāhā |
“Whoever writes this invincible queen of spells for averting named Sitātapatrā born from the uṣṇīṣa of all tathāgatas on birch bark, cloth, or tree bark and wears it on their body or around their neck or reads it will not be harmed by poison, weapons, fevers, disease, punishments, fire, water, kṛtyā rites, poisonous brews, poisonous compounds, or kākhordas for as long as they live, nor will they meet an untimely death. They will become dear to and delight all grahas, vighnas, and vināyakas. They will recall their rebirths of the past eight trillion four hundred million eons. Eighty-four billion vidyā deities of the vajra family will always and perpetually guard, protect, and defend them. The eighty-four vajra dūtīs and kiṅkaras will always defend them, hold them to be dear, and delight in them. They will never become yakṣas, rākṣasas,  bhūtas, pretas, piśācas, pūtanas, or kaṭapūtanas, nor will they ever be poor. They will gain a quantity of merit equal to that of the blessed buddhas, who are as innumerable and limitless as grains of sand in the river Ganges.
“If one keeps this invincible queen of spells for averting named Sitātapatrā born from the uṣṇīṣa of all tathāgatas, one will become chaste if one was not chaste.  Those who did not observe silence will observe silence. The impure will become pure. Those who did not practice abstinence will practice abstinence. Even those who committed the five acts with immediate retribution will see their evil entirely purified. All the obscurations resulting from their past actions will be exhausted without exception.
“If a woman who wishes to have a child keeps this invincible queen of spells for averting named Sitātapatrā born from the uṣṇīṣa of all tathāgatas, she will gain a child. The child will have a long life and possess merit and strength. After they pass away, they will take birth in Sukhāvatī, where they will be free of desire, aversion, delusion, pride, and vanity. 
“Those who are threatened by diseases that affect humans, cattle, or livestock or by epidemics, calamities, infectious diseases, mental disturbances, and the approach of opposing armies should affix this invincible queen of spells for averting named the blessed, undefeated, perfectly awakened Sitātapatrā born from the uṣṇīṣa of all tathāgatas to the top of a banner and worship it extensively with great offerings.  The banner should then be planted at the gateway to any city or at a monastery, village, city, realm, market town, charnel ground, mountain, or wilderness residence. As soon as this invincible queen of spells for averting has been worshiped and planted, war will be pacified, as will calamities, violence, harm, epidemics, mental disturbances, and the approach of opposing armies. Ananta, Śaṅkhapāla,  Mahākṛṣṇa, Nanda and Upananda, and all the other nāga kings will send timely rain, lightning, and peals of thunder. All illness and calamities will be completely pacified. 
oṁ hūṁ ṣṭoṃ bandha bandha sarvaduṣṭān rakṣa mama saparivārasya sarvasattvāṃśca svāhā | oṁ hūṁ ṣṭoṃ bandha bandha sarvaduṣṭān rakṣa rakṣa mama saparivārasya sarvasattvāṃśca vajrapāṇe hūṁ phaṭ svāhā | oṁ sarvatathāgatoṣṇiṣa avalokite mūrdhani tejorāśi | oṁ jvala jvala | khāda khāda | dhaka dhaka | dara dara | vidara vidara | chinda chinda | bhindi bhinda | hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ rakṣa rakṣa mama saparivārasya sarvasattvāṃśca svāhā | oṁ sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣasitātapatre hūṁ phaṭ svāhā | hūṁ hūṁ rakṣa rakṣa mama saparivārasya sarvasattvāṃśca hūṁ phaṭ svāhā || tadyathā | oṁ anale anale | acale acale | khasame khasame | vīre vīre | vaira vaira | saumye saumye | sarvabuddhādhiṣṭhānādhiṣṭhite sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣasitātapatre sarvaduṣṭacittān hūṁ phaṭ svāhā ||
“When facing any calamity this should be recited three times in connection with the Buddha.”
After the Blessed One spoke these words, all buddhas and the bodhisattvas, together with the world of devas humans, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
Thus concludes the noble invincible great queen of spells for averting called “Sitātapatrā Born from the Uṣṇīṣa of All Tathāgatas.”