{{translation:{id:UT22084-091-006,key:toh609,version:1.0.2,style:plain}}}
The Noble Dhāraṇī That Fully Confers Freedom From All Dangers
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was traveling through the land of Magadha when he arrived at a mango grove. At that mango grove, he took up residence in the Indra’s Rock Cave on Vaidehaka Mountain. Śakra the lord of the devas then appeared before the Blessed One. He bowed his head at the Blessed One’s feet and sat to one side. 
Having sat to one side, Śakra the lord of the devas told the Blessed One, “Blessed One, the asuras are causing me great harm. Blessed One, the asuras are adversaries who have been hostile to me for a long time. Blessed One, please offer me a teaching.”
The Blessed One told Śakra the lord of the devas, “Lord of the devas, uphold the vidyāmantra that confers freedom from all dangers. It accomplishes all aims and quells all dangers. It alleviates all diseases, neutralizes all poisons, and stops all weapons. It paralyzes all legless, two-legged, and four-legged beings. It defeats all adversaries. It defeats asuras, garuḍas, daityas, piśācas, apasmāras, unmādas, brahmanical rākṣasas, bhūtas, vetālas, śakuni grahas, pūtanas, revatīs, ostāraka grahas, ostārakas, apasmāra grahas, deva grahas, nāga grahas, yakṣa grahas, gandharva grahas, kinnara grahas, vināyaka grahas, and mātṛ grahas. And it utterly defeats ojohāras, beings who feed on garlands, fragrances, flowers, incense, blood, pus, filth, and urine for sustenance. It completely overcomes all infectious diseases, vātikas, paittikas, śleṣmikas, sānnipātikas, and malevolent beings. It brings perfect peace from all conflicts, disputes, wars, and scandals. I will recite the vidyāmantra that confers freedom from all dangers:
tadyathā | aḍe maḍe pramaḍe pravaṃ madiri gole mavoli vose modde vadde kharadte kharane graṇa graṇe gaṇa pragaṇe moṇe pratimoṇe kālī prakālī caṇḍe mahācaṇḍe praticaṇḍe vege ativege sona gona mohā pramohā mota pramoṭā nāśāni pranāśāni dhavanī pradhavanī valaganī pravalanī nṛdtyanī pranṛdtyanī pāniṭhāni krodhāni pratikrodhāni hana hana vihana vihana sarva­duṣṭapraduṣṭān nāśaya sarvābhayaprade | Protect myself and all those around me from all dangers, all grahas, and all transmittable diseases. Protect. Accomplish all my aims in this place. Thus: khidi khidi cumbe sarva­sattvahite rate namaḥ sarva­buddhānāṃ svāhā
“Lord of the devas, anyone who ties a knot in a thread with this vidyāmantra of forty-one words that confers freedom from all dangers and wears it, ties it in their hair, chants it, incants mustard seeds or bezoar with it once and rubs that on themselves, or incants armor with it will be invulnerable to weapons. They will be invulnerable to poison, infectious diseases, single-day fevers, two-day fevers, three-day fevers, four-day fevers, fires, mantras, vetālas, venoms, and diseases. They will never die by drowning. They will accomplish all applications of vidyāmantras and mantras that they practiced yet failed to accomplish through their applications. Others will never be able to harm their accomplished applications. They will be freed from bondage caused by opposing forces. They will destroy others’ vidyāmantras and make their own vidyāmantras multiply. They will defeat all grahas and, if the grahas do not release them, the grahas’ heads will burst into seven pieces like the foliage of a basil plant.” 
Thereupon, Śakra the lord of the devas himself disappeared. After the Blessed One had spoken, Śakra the lord of the devas rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had taught. 
This concludes the noble dhāraṇī “Conferring Freedom from All Dangers.”
Translated and edited by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Dānaśīla along with the chief editor and translator Bandé Yeshé Dé; later revised according to the new language reforms and then finalized.