{{translation:{id:UT22084-091-064,key:toh667,version:1.0.9,style:plain}}}
The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla
Homage to the body of Enthralling Paramāśva.
Chapter 1: The Introduction
Thus did I hear at one time. At the southeastern charnel ground Aṭṭahāsa, in the sandalwood grove called Joyous, the vināyaka Glorious Mahākāla was present in the palace where a multitude of male and female nonhuman beings gathered. At the time, in the midst of a retinue of cruel beings, he was known as “Mahākāla Who Controls the Life Breath of Living Beings.” 
At the same time, in the western world system, the King of Horses, Bringer of Death, was surrounded by an assembly of the Four Great Kings and the rest. He entered the absorption that tames arrogant beings while using the hook mudrā and reciting the mantra oṃ vajrakrodha hayagrīva hūṁ hulu hulu hūṁ vaṃ. Powerless to do otherwise, Mahākāla appeared before the King of Horses, Bringer of Death, from his abode in the Aṭṭahāsa charnel ground.
“What can I do for you?” he asked, and politely offered his own mark, the essence of his life force, oṃ vajra­mahākāla kṣiṃ kṣetra­vighnān vināyaka hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ. 
This is chapter 1 in “The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla,” the “Introduction.”
Chapter 2: The Worship Rite and Sādhana
Then King Virūpakṣa supplicated the King of Horses, Bringer of Death, with the following verses: 
“O Wrathful Lotus Lord, 
Please explain the secret practice 
For the terrible form of Mahākāla.
Regarding the acts for practicing the Lord,
“Great Supreme Horse, please tell us about
Killing and severing the life force and the body, 
Instructions for when the rite does not work, and the place of death,
The Lord’s signs, and casting hailstorms.”
Wrathful Lotus then gave the following teaching 
On the Black One’s sādhana: 
“For a mantrin who holds the samayas 
To protect the teachings of the Buddha,
“They should gather the accumulation of merit
During an auspicious planetary conjunction and lunar day
In a place with a single tree such as a charnel ground
And perform Mahākāla’s sādhana.
“Construct a square altar using 
Soil from a mound or black soil, and 
Sprinkle it with perfume, incense, and blood.
In the middle, draw a triangle with a half moon 
“Surrounded by a lotus with eight petals. 
There should be a large skull in the middle of that, containing
A bali offering and offering cake one cubit high,
Adorned with the five meats and various bodily essences.
“One should insert an arrow and a dark red cloth into it,
Along with a knife, a heart, and a small image of the deity. 
Set this out as the Lord’s seat. 
Write the Lord’s life-force mantra
“On the inside of the skin of the ḍamaru.
Roll it up with a soul stone and place it inside.
Present an offering of incense and the daily bali.
Set out the common offering to the Three Jewels.
“Visualize oneself on a lotus,
Imagine light rays radiating from the hṛīḥ at the heart, 
Make the guru, the Buddha, and so forth 
Appear right before oneself,
“And offer them five offerings. 
After the sevenfold purification rite, 
Meditate on the four immeasurables, beginning with
Equanimity and so forth, and the syllables vaṃ, raṃ, and tri.
“Out of the syllable hūṁ on top of the lotus
Emerges Mahākāla with a black face and six arms,
Holding a hooked knife, rosary, ḍamaru, 
Skull, spear, and noose
“In his right hands and left hands respectively. 
He is adorned with snakes and jewelry.
He wears a multicolored garment on his lower body
And a lower garment made of a tiger’s skin.
“He has three fierce eyes and bares his fangs. 
His forehead is adorned with a drop of filth.
Akṣobhya’s emanation body sits on his crown. 
Visualize him clearly before oneself while
“Performing the invitation, offering, and mantra recitation. 
Present gifts to Mahākāla using the
Bali offering, offering ceremony, and the like.
The syllables of the vitality mantra emerge from 
“The hūṁ at the Lord’s heart and circle clockwise as one
Recites the following mantra in continuous rounds:
oṃ vajra­mahākāla kṣiṃ kṣetra­vighnān vināyaka hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ |
An excellent recitation practice will result in signs 
That one has accomplished the Black One’s siddhi.” 
This is chapter 2 in “The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla” on “The Worship Rite and Sādhana.”
Chapter 3: Severing the Life Force from the Body
“Now I will teach the following:
If one wants beings who destroy the Buddhist teachings
Or create obstacles for yogins
To be liberated by Mahākāla,
“Make a square altar again and place
The skulls of a man and woman with no descendants
With wax effigies inside of them
Inside of a fierce triangular diagram.
“Affix their name and clan name and
Add the word ‘kill’ or ‘infect’ as appropriate. 
Set up the image of the Lord and the samaya substances,
And place some in each of their mouths. 
“Place powerful substances in a boar’s skull
And set the continual and daily bali offerings on the left and right.
“Perform the killing rite with the following mantra: 
oṃ vajramahākāla kṣiṃ kṣetravighnānvināyaka hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ | oṃ mahākālāyaśāsanopakāriṇieṣa apaścimakālo ’yam idaṃ ratnatrayāya apakāriṇaṃ yadi pratijñāṃsmarasi tadā idaṃ duṣṭaṃ kha kha khāhi khāhi | māra māra | ghṛhṇa ghṛhṇa | bandha bandha | hana hana | daha daha | paca paca | dinam ekena māraya hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ | hūṁ vināyakavilāsatraṃ vi tri hūṁ ja si ma bu vināyaka create obstacles for the life force of so-and-so whose name has been written ja māraya I implore you! |
“Recite the fierce mantra while pelting them with the powerful substances. 
Do not speak for an entire week. 
At that point, the signs will be directly apparent.” 
This is chapter 3 in “The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla” on “Severing the Life Force from the Body.”
Chapter 4: The Concluding Rite
“Now I will explain the end of the rite, 
Which is concluded with a fire offering. 
Generate Mahākāla with his retinue in the middle
Of a triangle of sarala pine branches.
“Place the effigy, bali offering, 
And ritual substances in Mahākāla’s mouth. 
Recite the mantra while performing the fire offering,
And finish with the phrase agne jvala raṃ.
“Let the ashes be taken away by a strong wind.
The target of the rite will quickly come to ruin.”
This is chapter 4 in “The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla” on “The Concluding Rite.” 
Chapter 5: The Enhancing Rite for When the Rite Does Not Work, and the Mending Rite
“Next, I shall teach the following:
If one performs the practice but it does not work,
Generate it in earnest once or twice more. 
If one does that and it still does not work,
“Make an image of the Black One out of
The three soils, three bloods, and three types of poison
That is one cubit tall, and place it atop two switches
So that it hovers over the middle of the triangle. 
“The painting, samaya substances, and soul stone
Are placed beneath one’s own triangular cushion
And should be covered with poison and thorns.
Pelt it with powerful substances while reciting this mantra:
oṃ vajrakrodha hayagrīva hūṁ hulu hulu hūṁ phaṭ | phaṭ hūṁ hūṁ akayāniv nānghivarteṣk ṃiṣk alākāhamarjav oṃ |
“Signs that the rite has worked will become fully apparent while
One is pelting it with powerful substances and reciting the mantra.
After that, one should perform the mending ritual.
Wash the painting, soul stone, and samaya substances
“With perfumed water and recite this mantra:
oṃ vajramahākāla kṣiṃ kṣetravighnān vināyaka hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ mend mend svāhā |
“Wash the statue of the Lord with perfumed water
In the location where you have recited the mantra.
Remove it from the middle of the triangle and
“Place the enemy’s name and clan name in the heart. 
Perform this practice for seven days, bring it to the enemy, 
And it will quickly destroy the designated target.” 
This is chapter 5 in “The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla” on “The Enhancing Rite for When the Rite Does Not Work and the Mending Rite.” 
Chapter 6: A Series of Signs of Accomplishment
“Now, I will teach the following:
A raven will take flight and circle, 
And tribal people, mendicants,
Spiritual friends, venerable ones, and masters 
“Will all perceive the Lord’s light, sound, 
Walled palace, and body before them. 
The being leading the enemy’s army will be killed. 
Ordinary people will gain confidence.
“Lepers and beggars will arise, as will 
Ravens that have alighted in a field.”
This is chapter 6 in “The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla” on “A Series of Signs of Accomplishment.”
Chapter 7: Hailstorms
“Next, I will teach the following:
To perform a rite to make it hail,
Draw a wheel with four spokes 
In the skull of a tribal person or a leper.
“Inscribe it with the seed syllables of the five classes of nāgas.
The large spokes should bear the name and family names of the hail protectors
And have the phrase ‘fall in this country’ written on them.
Write the mantras of the arrogant spirit beings 
“On a wheel with nine spokes outside of that.
Write the name of the country and 
The wind heart mantra on the back side. 
Visualize yourself as Wrathful Lotus
“And strike their vital points using this mantra:
oṃ vajramahākāla kṣiṃ kṣetravighnān vināyaka hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ | torment the nāga’s mind | phu create obstacles ja khroṃ śar hril bhyo |
“Recite that mantra while
Pelting the skull with white and black 
Mustard seeds, blood, and poison.
“If a gust of wind carries off the harvest, it is a sign 
That hail will fall in the enemy’s country. 
If it does, it will bring ruin to the people.” 
This is chapter 7 in “The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla” on “Hailstorms.” 
Chapter 8
Then he gave the following definitive instruction:
“Marvelous ones gathered in this assembly, 
In the future, when samaya holders perform this sādhana,
They should maintain the samayas, uphold the vows, 
“And diligently perform the bali offerings. 
They should wear the samaya substances and soul stones on their body.”
After he said that, King Virūpakṣa along with the rest of the assembly rejoiced, promised to maintain Mahākāla’s teaching, and then vanished. 
This concludes chapter 8 in “The Tantra of Glorious Mahākāla.”
This text was translated by the Indian preceptor Amoghavajra and the Tibetan translator Phurbu Ö.