{{translation:{key:toh738,version:1.0.2,style:plain}}}
In Praise of the Glorious Goddess Sarasvatī
In the path that leads to awakening, 
The victors and their heirs, masters of the Dharma,
And the multitudes of wisdom maṇḍalas 
Arranged in successive levels of knowing—in these we seek refuge.
Homage to you, glorious goddess Sarasvatī.
Your mastery over speech is renowned throughout the world
And you have transcended the three knowledges of the sages. 
All of this is the result of your vast conduct.
You take up the burden of immense activities
And joyfully endure every hardship for the benefit of beings.
Coursing through the levels and the ten perfections,
And standing steadfast in stores of virtue, you take whatever form is needed.
Your rounded face is the flawless moon in full.
Your lustrous eyes of compassion open the eyes of others
As you gaze at length upon every last universe, effortlessly.
It is before you that the likes of Devendra and Brahmā bow down.
Compassionate mother, replete with love and patience,
It is your delight, noble goddess, to nurture every single being.
Your eloquence is lofty and your top-knot rivals mountain peaks.
Your wisdom runs deep as you act in support of knowledge. 
Wielding mastery over fields of knowledge, you are the patroness of words.
As you are the god of all gods in the universe,
And a supreme companion who endeavors to dispel our suffering,
Even extremist scholars bow down before you. 
 Your limbs are well proportioned, and your voice is ever sweet.
Poised with majesty, you glow with flawless qualities and merit.
As it is you who grants the accomplishments of the highest knowledge,
Grant us swift intellect, retention of words, and eloquence most supreme!
With the welfare of every being always in your heart, 
Eminent and unfailing goddess, you dwell in liberation.
Firm in your promises, you consider with grace
Those who call upon you, and you fulfill their every wish.
As the master of sound, you capture in words
Everything that appears in the universe.
You are understood by all and skilled in expression.
O Sarasvatī, your capabilities are inconceivable. 
Wielding mastery over the might of dhāraṇī and Dharma,
You, a capable ṛṣi, have genuinely mastered the samaya.
Bestowing your blessing on our bodies, minds, and speech,
You work to satisfy the world with your ever-pleasing voice.
You are admired by all for your conduct of supreme awakening.
Blessed Lady, please continue always to grant the supreme purpose
To those who desire the boon of pure body, speech, and mind
With which to bring about the perfect benefit of beings.
Help us to be brave as we strive along the path to awakening.
Let our tongues be quick and our words be righteous.
Endow us with treasuries of knowledge and speech unobstructed.
Allow us to achieve the full eloquence of all the well-gone ones.
Mother of knowledge, your nature is devoid of conceptuality.
The flag of your reputation flutters in the winds of joy.
Like wanting to draw a picture in the sky,
Your attributes are hard to comprehend, your qualities are boundless.
namo bhagavate brahmaṇe | namaḥ sarasvatyai devi siddhyantu mantrapādam brahmānumantra svāhā.
This concludes “In Praise of the Glorious Goddess Sarasvatī.”