{{translation:{id:UT22084-094-017,key:toh740,version:1.0.1,style:plain}}}
The Noble
Sūtra of Mahāśrī
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was residing in Sukhāvatī. Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva, the noble Avalokiteśvara, set out to where the Blessed One was residing. Having arrived, he bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One, circumambulated the Blessed One thrice, and sat down on one side. 
Then the Blessed One looked at Mahāśrī and said this to the noble Avalokiteśvara: “Whosoever, including monks and nuns, laymen and laywomen, gets to know, upholds, recites, writes down, or commissions to have written down these twelve names of Mahāśrī will escape destitution and become wealthy.”
Then the entire host of spirits said, “May it be so!” 
Then the Blessed One spoke the twelve names of Mahāśrī: “It is thus—Splendor, Welfare, She Who Is Wearing a Garland of Lotuses, Mistress of Wealth, White One, She of Great Fame, Lotus-Eyed One, She of Great Radiance, She Who Accomplishes, Bestower of Nourishment, She of Jewel-Like Gleam, Great Splendor.
syād yathedam—jini ghriṇi sarvārtha­sādhani śaśini | alakṣmīṃ me nāśaya | sidhyantu me mantrapadāḥ svāhā | oṁ bhṛkuṭi paramasubhage svāhā |
“One should recite this three times. Whosoever recites it at the three junctures of the day will have all their adversities destroyed and will become fortunate and of inexhaustible wealth. If one recites this before going out to meet other people, those people will think of one as their son, they will be pleased, and they will do whatever one instructs. If one recites continuously, Brahmā and brahmins may perform aggressive rituals, but one will not be harmed; rather, it will be as if one had performed service to many buddhas.”
Thus spoke the Blessed One, and the bodhisattva, the noble Avalokiteśvara, was gladdened and praised the speech of the Blessed One. 
Here ends the noble “Sūtra of Mahāśrī.”
This was translated, checked, and redacted by the Indian preceptor Jinamitra and the great editor-translator Bandé Yeshé Dé.