{{translation:{key:toh728,version:1.0.11,style:plain}}}
The Hundred and Eight Names of the Goddess Tārā
 Homage to the great goddess Tārā, the completely victorious jewel, who, with her exquisite necklace, garments, and lower robes, is a canopy for the great worldly realm. 
At that time, the goddess Tārā uttered this supreme dhāraṇī, which had never been seen or heard before:
oṁ trailokyavijaya | acittajaya | aniracijataya | sujaya | vijaya | mahājaya | vijaya | jaya jaya | he he | smara smara | vara vara varada | mahādevi | vilasa | vilasa | vilasa | vaja amotakari vijayadevi | hī hī | kiṇi kiṇi vilambase | smara smara | mahāprajñā anipata | vajramahākāruṇika | bhagini hruṃ hruṃ | sphuṭa sphuṭa | sphoṭa sphoṭa | āveśaya āveśaya | dhuna dhuna | vidhuna vidhuna | kampa kampa | kampaya | surabhigandha | atisita | mukhe haladavala | saṃgarājana | vimavigi | vināśaya vināśaya | he bhagavati | santrāsaya vighanān | parivalāya asmākaṃ asmākaṃ | mādani mādani | saṃbodhaya | saṃmohaya | hara hara | hiri hiri | huru huru | vitakara | varaja | haṃ haṃ | trotāya | haṃ haṃ | santratāya | santroya | manta manta | marda marda | cara cara | saṃcara saṃcara | vega vega vegavati | namo namo namaḥ svāhā |
Upon hearing this great mantra,
Supremely renowned in the three realms,
The assemblies of gods and asuras,
Together with the hordes of rākṣasas, 
Yakṣas, kinnaras, mahoragas,
Bhūtas, gandharvas, and vināyakas,
Grew afraid and hung their heads low.
With their mighty arms trembling, they said:
“Homage to you, Tārā, the broad-eyed one,
Who turns away the speech of Kāmadeva,
So that your names may fill the three realms!
“Proclaimer of Avalokiteśvara’s lineage,
Light renowned for its greatness, O broad-eyed one, 
You came into being to help sentient beings!”
Then, all the gods and asuras,
Such as Śiva and the others, gathered together.
The lords among vidyādharas 
And the vidyādharas themselves
Draped their upper garments across their shoulders,
Performed excellent circumambulations, and, 
Bending their knees to the ground, 
Spoke the following words: 
“O Tārā, goddess of blazing light, 
To you we pay homage! Homage! Homage to you!
Your hundred and eight peerless and pristine names
We will now recite:
“Glorious, exalted one, ever victorious and propitious,
Your extrasensory powers are as swift as Prajāpati’s.
Your fierceness instills fear in the Lord of Love,
Yet you are free of carelessness and conceit.
“Your eyes, face, and navel 
Are lotus-like and exude purity.
Your broad, beautiful eyes glow blue
Like the blue of the utpala flower.
“You protect all those worthy of care,
Granting them happiness, strength, and beauty.
Protector and fierce guardian,
You enact the deeds of the Three Jewels. 
“Your lips and fingernails shine red.
With bloodshot eyes you gaze.
Joyful, lotus-like force of joy, 
You are the color of the lotus, in whose hues you delight! 
“With your extraordinary strength and frightful attire
You tame and pacify the three worlds.
Subduer who acts to tame beings,
Noble one, you are praised as supreme among all.
“Holder of the vajra of resplendent clarity that tames beings,
Utterly victorious clear light,
You are awake, beyond taint or stain,
And you are honored by Candra and the outstanding gods.
“Your beautiful beams of light
Pervade all objects of desire.
Majestic in your battle with Varuṇa,
Supreme one, your mind is naturally expansive and pervasive.
“With your triple crown ornament, three belly folds, and three eyes
You clear away the three defilements.
Dispeller of phenomenal existence, lady of deep virtue,
You are also renowned for your eloquence.
“You grant victory and merit
And fearlessly vanquish evil.
Lady of peace who grants wealth and luster,
Your form, belly, and bosom are most elegant!
“Lady of illusion who tames the field of illusory displays,
You uphold discipline and dispel all impurity.
Holding a garland, you bring elation,
Grant exhilaration, and remove all conceit.
“Wrathful lady who inspires splendor,
White lady of bliss who brings peace,
Sovereign lady of all living beings, noble and mighty goddess, 
You hold and bestow sacred knowledge.
“Your moon-like face glows with moonlight,
Stealing away the moon’s own effulgence.
Lady who delights in robbing the radiance of the sun,
You are beautiful, exalted, and wholly at peace! 
“Blissful steppingstone to happiness,
You remove all that stands in the way of good fortune.
You make wealth increase and merit ever-victorious. 
You gleam like gold and silver from the Jambu River. 
“Dispeller of fears and bestower of fearlessness,
You are Tārā; your face is like the moon.
You never stray far from any sentient being.
You bring joy and are worthy of worship and homage. 
“Your exalted garments glimmer with blue hues;
You are beautifully adorned with red ornaments;
And, like Gaṅgā, you dress in yellow clothing.
Blazing white lady, you are all-seeing! 
“Fragrant as a ball of bezoar,
You are the adamantine Varuṇa and retinue.
Fearsome lady, queen of the supreme maṇḍala,
With your white teeth you laugh and smile. 
“You wear armlets, earrings, and bracelets
And are wreathed in glimmering crystal necklaces.
Lady with a face of beauty, wearing a superb sash,
You are accompanied by the one who holds a sprig of neem leaves.
“You wear a jeweled diadem, hold a jewel,
And are adorned with jeweled ornaments.
You are adorned with a band of beautiful gems,
And sparkle like precious stones.
“Vajra lady, you radiate with blazing colors,
Awakening men and women both.
Fanged one who wields the rod of peace,
You are as strong as Brahmā and as swift as the wind.
“You are the woman who descends from the sky
And shines with the light of a supreme goddess.
Luminous one who conquers through desire,
You have vanquished the torment of desire.
“Wrathful one with a topknot and diadem, victorious one, 
You are Brahmā and have the speech of Brahmā.
Your beautiful voice rings like the call of the kalaviṅka.
Sovereign of the world, you are born within the supreme family!
“Fierce lady adorned with the resplendence of jewels
And holding a staff with adamantine leaves,
Your immaculate earrings sway as you move.
Such is how you dawn in the minds of those in Yama’s realm.
“You are the one taking the form of a vidyādharī.
You are endowed with five strengths and bestow strength. 
Wielding strength as well as absence of strength,
You cut with the blade of wisdom.
“You are crafty and full of art,
And your voice resounds mightily,
Like a bouquet of campaka flowers
Brightens a courtyard or hall from above.
Wrathful one, you hold a bouquet in your hand
And are an excellent support for yellow-clad monastics.
Fortunate one, you are decked in ornaments
And experience great delight. 
“Vajra fury who brings joy,
You are endowed with the signs and great strength of your lineage.
With your bliss, intelligence, and adamantine means,
You bestow understanding and increase wisdom. 
“Goddess of the resplendent diadem,
Your manner is greater than all the gods.
As Nārāyaṇī, you dispel negativity,
And you delight in auspiciousness and modesty. 
“Lady of gladness, you delight all who associate with you
And you delight in those who delight in wholesome conduct.
Delightful lady who exudes delight,
You are an excellent support for all qualities.
“Lady who emanates buddha emanations,
And who works to dispel pride,
You destroy karma and afflictions,
And conquer all forms of desire.
“You are a buddha with the ten knowledges,
And you uphold the ten perfections.
You have reached the ten grounds,
And shine bright with the light of the ten strengths. 
“You wear a vajra diadem and wield a vajra.
With your subtle vajra you clear away asuras.
With the vajra of time you bring elation,
And you wield the vajra hook of bliss and glory.
“Charming lady who holds a vajra in her hand
And wields a vajra lasso, an excellent lasso,
You are captivating; you bring satisfaction to the mind,
And you dispel all opponents and obstacle makers.
“You bring about contentment and great happiness,
And reveal the way of play and dance.
Rich in Dharma, you have the radiance of halāhala.
Giver of the Dharma, your gaze is vast.
“You are a vajra emanation,
And are said to be vajra nectar.
Great goddess, powerful with a blazing vajra,
To you we pay homage!
“With this praise of ours,
We recite your hundred and eight sublime names.
Amazing! The supreme Blessed One herself
Has spoken the most sublime of utterances.”
Then, the magnificent goddess Tārā,
Who is like the light of the moon
And blazes with radiance,
Revealed a smile and spoke:
“Maheśvara and the rest of you, 
Listen now to my words.
Always be agreeable with everyone
As you strive to attain the ten strengths. 
At all times, protect the great way 
Of the thus-gone ones.
Keeping your minds on the path of peace, 
You must cross over the unbearable ocean of cyclic existence, 
Which is the source of great terrors
And is so difficult to ford.
Setting your mind upon the city of nirvāṇa,
You must strive for it and enter it.”
Then Tārā, whose face is as beautiful 
As a garland of the sun’s blazing rays,
Spoke the following words
Like the rumbling thunder of the Thus-Gone One:
“O wonder! This excellent vidyāmantra of Tārā
Clears away all darkness,
Creates immense power and strength,
And cuts through all obscurations.
“This dhāraṇī, which brings so much joy,
Will not be heard by the masses
Who have not purified themselves
By cultivating inner confidence.
“This great samaya, the samaya of this vidyāmantra,
Will arise for those
Who have developed stable confidence,
From their prior efforts toward buddhahood.
“Whoever upholds this sublime, indestructible dhāraṇī-mantra,
Which quells all afflictions,
Eliminates all negativity,
And nurtures all beings—
Whoever, in meditative equipoise,
Hears it, reads it, or keeps it in mind—
Will accomplish all their aims
As was stated by the Self-Arisen One. 
“They will be liberated from all affliction, 
Become the most excellent of sentient beings, 
And will be equal to the thus-gone ones
Who are immersed in knowledge of every world’s phenomena.
“Whoever chants these hundred and eight names
And praises Tārā’s moon-like face in this way 
Will reach buddhahood itself.
They will accomplish all their aims
And gain control over kings, powerful people, 
And any number of other beings.
“This praise, known as The Hundred and Eight Names of the Goddess Tārā with a Lovely Face,
Fills the many worlds 
And dispels all afflictions and everything untoward!
“Her body, which is like the supreme mountain of thus-gone ones,
Shakes the mountain ascended by the clans of māras.
She is the light that fully awakens gods and humans.
“This eminent one is renowned for her profound dedication
To the great collection of well-spoken teachings
Ceaselessly transmitted by the most eminent of the Victor’s heirs
Through their stability in the unique powers.
Appearing for the benefit of all, she condenses this Dharma,
And thus expertly soothes the fevers of the mind.”
After these words that dispel unbearable afflictions,
And which produce a tranquil mind,
Were spoken by the supreme Victor,
Tārā remained still and did not speak further.
Astonished and enraptured by the sublime goddess Tārā,
The entire assembly of devas and asuras was filled with joy and wonder
Upon hearing these instructive words that evoke deep joy and grant happiness and long life.
Overjoyed, they joined their hands above their heads as their speech was stilled.
This completes the dhāraṇī named “Supreme Tārā, the Hundred and Eight Names of the Goddess Tārā.”