{{translation:{id:UT22084-096-062,key:toh813,version:1.1.22,style:plain}}}
The Aspiration Prayer from “Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm”
 Homage to the Three Jewels! 
In this world or beyond there is nothing—
Not even a precious gem in the higher realms—
That equals the Thus-Gone One, the god of gods,
The supreme among humans.
Thus, he is called the most precious gem.
By this truth may there be well-being here! 
There is nothing at all comparable to the Dharma
Of uncompounded, quiescent ambrosia—
The uncompounded ambrosia of extinction and dispassion
Discerned by the Sage of the Śākyas through his knowledge.
Thus, it is called the most precious gem.
By this truth may there be well-being here! 
There is nothing comparable to the absorption
That perceives the vajra-like, nondual path—
The manifestation, in due order, of what is most desired,
The permanent accomplishment of the teacher’s absolute practice.
Thus, it is called the most precious gem.
By this truth may there be well-being here! 
The eight great kinds of person praised
And called the four pairs,
Extolled as “venerable” by the Thus-Gone One,
The incomparable person, the Great Sage,
Yield great fruits when offered to,
Like seeds planted in a fertile field—
This is called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
By this truth may there be well-being here! 
Since those who strive with firm resolve
And enter Gautama’s teaching
Gain access to ambrosia,
Remove darkness, and attain nirvāṇa, 
They are called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
By this truth may there be well-being here!
As soon as they connect with this vision,
Belief in the transitory collection,
Ethical discipline in the form of extreme austerity,
And doubt are simultaneously cast off,
And they see the truths of the noble ones. 
Thus, they are called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
By this truth may there be well-being here!
With body, speech, or mind
They never produce the threefold evil deeds,
And even when they suddenly do, they do not conceal them,
And in that way, their view is not tainted with grasping.
Thus, they are called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
By this truth may there be well-being here! 
Just as a threshold beam planted in the ground
Is unmoved by winds from the four directions,
So are the members of the saṅgha of noble ones,
Who have insight into the highest path of the noble ones.
Thus, they are called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
By this truth may there be well-being here! 
Those who cultivate with profound wisdom
The eloquently taught truths of the noble ones
And consider giving away even their own bodies
Never encounter the eight perils.
Thus, they are called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
By this truth may there be well-being here! 
Just as a flame extinguished by the wind
Cannot be taken up and counted,
So do the offspring of the buddhas
Become indemonstrable
Once they have discarded all fetters.
Thus, they are called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
By this truth may there be well-being here! 
May all sentient beings, moving or still, be well here!
And may they pay homage to the Buddha,
The supreme teacher, venerated by gods and humans!
May there be well-being here today! 
May all sentient beings, moving or still, be well here!
May they pay homage to the Dharma,
The peaceful dispassion venerated by gods and humans!
May there be well-being here today! 
May all sentient beings, moving or still, be well here!
May they pay homage to the Saṅgha,
The supreme assembly venerated by gods and humans!
May there be well-being here today! 
May all sentient beings, moving or still, 
Be well here! 
May whatever bhūtas are assembled here,
All those who dwell upon the earth or in the sky,
Act always lovingly toward all creatures
And practice Dharma day and night!
By the truth that the Victorious One, having vanquished his foes,
Spoke truthfully, without falsehood,
May there be well-being here,
And may all be delivered from grave perils!
✦  ✦  ✦
By the majesty of all the buddhas,
The majesty of the pratyekabuddhas,
The powers of the arhats,
And all the secret mantra holders,
By the wisdom of Śāriputra,
The supernatural power of Maudgalyāyana,
The vision of Aniruddha,
And the ascetic practices of Kāśyapa;
By the previous attainments of Kauṇḍinya,
The learning of Ānanda,
The benevolence of Brahmā,
And the supremacy of Śatakratu;
By the territories of the guardians of the world,
The power of Maheśvara,
The might of the generals,
And the supernatural splendor of Hārītī—
Through their might and majesty,
May poison be removed from me!
This completes the aspiration prayer from the words spoken in “Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm.”