Chapter 9
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is the four applications of mindfulness. If you ask what these four are, they are the application of mindfulness to the body, the application of mindfulness to feelings, the application of mindfulness to the mind, and the application of mindfulness to phenomena.
“If you ask what the application of mindfulness to the body is, in this respect, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing the inner body, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with the body. Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with the body. Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing the outer and inner body, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with the body. 
“Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing inner feelings, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with feelings. Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing outer feelings, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with feelings. Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing outer and inner feelings, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with feelings. 
“Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing the inner mind, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with mind. Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing the outer mind, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with mind. Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing the outer and inner mind, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with mind. 
“Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing inner phenomena, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with phenomena. Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing outer phenomena, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with phenomena. Bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing outer and inner phenomena, without apprehending anything and without forming conceptual thoughts to do with phenomena.
“Subhūti, if you ask how bodhisattva great beings practice observing the inner body, in this respect, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings are moving, they are fully aware that they are moving. When they are standing upright, they are fully aware that they are standing upright. When they are sitting, they are fully aware that they are sitting. When they are lying down, they are fully aware that they are lying down. When the body is comfortable or uncomfortable, and in whatever ways the body changes its posture, they are fully aware. Subhūti, it is in such ways that bodhisattva great beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, and have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, practice observing the inner body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings dwell in a body observing the inner body without apprehending anything. They remain alert, whether they are going out or returning. They remain alert, whether they are looking or peering. They remain alert, whether they are bending in or stretching out. They remain alert, whether they are wearing an upper robe or carrying an alms bowl. They remain alert, whether they are eating, drinking, chewing, or tasting. They remain alert, whether they are lying down or warding off the fatigue of sleep. They remain alert, whether they are going or coming. They remain alert, whether they are standing or sitting. They remain alert, whether they are falling asleep or not falling asleep. They remain alert, whether they are speaking or not speaking. And they also remain alert inside, settled in meditation. Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the inner body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they are fully aware that when they breathe in mindfully, they are breathing in mindfully. They are fully aware that when they breathe out mindfully, they are breathing out mindfully. They are fully aware that when they breathe in a long breath, they are breathing in a long breath. They are fully aware that when they breathe out a long breath, they are breathing out a long breath. They are fully aware that when they breathe in a short breath, they are breathing in a short breath. They are fully aware that when they breathe out a short breath, they are breathing out a short breath. Subhūti, this resembles, as an analogy, a skilled potter turning a wheel or a skilled apprentice of a potter turning a wheel. They are fully aware that when they are turning the wheel in a long whirl, they are turning the wheel in a long whirl, and they are fully aware that when they are turning the wheel in a short whirl, they are turning the wheel in a short whirl. Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they are fully aware that when they breathe in mindfully, they are breathing in mindfully. They are fully aware that when they breathe out mindfully, they are breathing out mindfully. They are fully aware that when they breathe in a long breath, they are breathing in a long breath. They are fully aware that when they breathe out a long breath, they are breathing out a long breath. They are fully aware that when they breathe in a short breath, they are breathing in a short breath. They are fully aware that when they breathe out a short breath, they are breathing out a short breath. Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the inner body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they correctly examine how this body has various elements—how it has the element of earth, and also has the element of water, the element of fire, and the element of wind. Subhūti, as an analogy, just as a skilled butcher of bulls or a skilled apprentice of a butcher of bulls slays a bull with a sharp instrument, cuts it into four parts, and then examines the quartered carcass, as they stand or sit, in the same way bodhisattva great beings who practice the perfection of wisdom also examine how this same body has various elements—how it has the element of earth, the element of water, the element of fire, and the element of wind. Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways, as they stand or sit, that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the inner body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they correctly examine how this same body is full of manifold impurities, from the soles of the feet upward, from the hair and the brain downward, and from the nails, body hair, and skin inward. That is to say, they correctly examine how this body has the hairs of the head, the hairs of the body, nails, epidermal skin, inner skin, flesh, ligaments, blood, bones, marrow, heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, spleen, large intestine, small intestine, colon, viscera, urinary tract, excrement, tears, sweat, fat, mucus, nasal mucus, pus, bile, phlegm, serum, saliva, filthy excretions, brain tissue, cerebral secretions, eye mucus, and ear wax. Subhūti, this is just like when the grain bins of a farmer have been filled with sesame, mustard seeds, lentils, beans, barley, wheat, rice, and diverse grains, and an observant passer-by, on opening them and looking at the contents, would know that these are sesame, these are mustard seeds, these are lentils, these are beans, these are barley, these are wheat, these are rice, and these are grains other than those. Subhūti, in the same way, bodhisattva great beings correctly examine how this very body is full of manifold impurities, from the soles of the feet upward, from the hair and the crown of the head downward, and from the nails, body hair, and skin inward. That is to say, they correctly examine how this body has the hairs of the head, the hairs of the body, nails, epidermal skin, inner skin, flesh, ligaments, blood, bones, marrow, heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, spleen, large intestine, small intestine, colon, viscera, urinary tract, excrement, tears, sweat, fat, mucus, nasal mucus, pus, bile, phlegm, serum, saliva, filthy excretions, brain tissue, cerebral secretions, eye mucus, and ear wax. 
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the inner body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, on seeing corpses that have been discarded in a charnel ground—those lying on a bier; those that have been dead for one day, dead for two days, dead for three days, dead for four days, or dead for five days; and those that are bloated, blue-black, putrefied, chewed on, or dismembered—they compare these circumstances to their own bodies: ‘This body too has attributes such as these. It has a nature such as these. It does not go beyond this reality.’ Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, on seeing corpses that have been discarded in a charnel ground, dead for six days, dead for seven days, being eaten by various sorts of wild creatures—ravens, crows, hawks, vultures, wolves, foxes, dogs, or any other of the various kinds of creatures—they compare these circumstances to their own bodies: ‘This body too has attributes such as these. It has a nature such as these. It does not go beyond this reality.’ Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, on seeing corpses that have been discarded in a charnel ground, chewed up, foul, festering, and rotten, they compare these circumstances to their own bodies: ‘This body too has attributes such as these. It has a nature such as these. It does not go beyond this reality.’ Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, on seeing the bones in a charnel ground, complete skeletons with fragments of flesh, smears of blood, tenuously joined together by tendons, they compare these to the circumstances of their own bodies: ‘This body too has attributes such as these. It has a nature such as these. It does not go beyond this reality.’ Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, on seeing the skeletal bones in a charnel ground, devoid of flesh and blood, without the adhesion of tendons, the color of conch shells, they compare these to the circumstances of their own bodies: ‘This body too has attributes such as these. It has a nature such as these. It does not go beyond this reality.’ Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, on seeing the bones in a charnel ground, scattered in the cardinal and intermediate directions, in one the foot bones, in another the shin bones, in another the thigh bones, in another the hip bones, in another the wrist bones, in another the rib bones, in another the neck bones, and in another the skull bones, they compare these to the circumstances of their own bodies: ‘This body too has attributes such as these. It has a nature such as these. It does not go beyond this reality.’ Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, on seeing the bones in a charnel ground, many years old, weathered by the wind and the sun, the color of conch shells, they compare these to the circumstances of their own bodies: ‘This body too has attributes such as these. It has a nature such as these. It does not go beyond this reality.’ Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything.
“Moreover, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, on seeing the bones in a charnel ground, many years old, appearing indistinctly, bluish grey like the color of a pigeon, scattered about in smelly small pieces, vying with the dust on the ground, they compare these to the circumstances of their own bodies: ‘This body too has attributes such as these. It has a nature such as these. It does not go beyond this reality.’ 
“Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, it is in such ways that they are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the inner body, without apprehending anything. They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer body, without apprehending anything. They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the inner and outer body, without apprehending anything.
“They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing inner feelings, without apprehending anything. They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing outer feelings, without apprehending anything. They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing inner and outer feelings, without apprehending anything.
“They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the inner mind, without apprehending anything. They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the outer mind, without apprehending anything. They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing the inner and outer mind, without apprehending anything.
“They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing inner phenomena, without apprehending anything. They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing outer phenomena, without apprehending anything. They are diligent, alert, and mindful, have eliminated covetousness and unhappiness with respect to the world, and practice observing inner and outer phenomena, without apprehending anything.
“This indeed, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the four correct exertions. If you ask what these four are, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, without apprehending anything, they resolve, endeavor, strive, develop tenacity, and rightly aspire to cause negative and nonvirtuous phenomena that have not yet arisen to not arise. Without apprehending anything, they resolve, endeavor, strive, develop tenacity, and rightly aspire to renounce negative and nonvirtuous phenomena that have previously arisen. Without apprehending anything, they resolve, endeavor, strive, develop tenacity, and rightly aspire to cause virtuous phenomena that have not yet arisen to arise. Without apprehending anything, they resolve, endeavor, strive, develop tenacity, and rightly aspire that virtuous phenomena that have previously arisen might remain stable, be repeatedly cultivated, be undiminished, and be fully completed. This too, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the four supports for miraculous ability. If you ask what these four are, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate the resolve that is a support for miraculous ability endowed with meditative stability and the formative force of exertion based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. They cultivate the perseverance that is a support for miraculous ability endowed with meditative stability and the formative force of exertion based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. They cultivate the mind that is a support for miraculous ability endowed with meditative stability and the formative force of exertion based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. And they cultivate the scrutinythat is a support for miraculous ability endowed with meditative stability and the formative force of exertion based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the five faculties. If you ask what these five are, they are the faculty of faith, the faculty of perseverance, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of meditative stability, and the faculty of wisdom. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the five powers. If you ask what these five are, they are the power of faith, the power of perseverance, the power of mindfulness, the power of meditative stability, and the power of wisdom. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the seven branches of enlightenment. If you ask what these seven are, they are the correct mindfulness branch of enlightenment, the correct analysis of phenomena branch of enlightenment, the correct perseverance branch of enlightenment, the correct delight branch of enlightenment, the correct pliability branch of enlightenment, the correct meditative stability branch of enlightenment, and the correct equanimity branch of enlightenment. 
“If you ask what the correct mindfulness branch of enlightenment is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, the correct mindfulness branch of enlightenment based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what the correct analysis of phenomena branch of enlightenment is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, the correct analysis of phenomena branch of enlightenment based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what the correct perseverance branch of enlightenment is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, the correct perseverance branch of enlightenment based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what the correct delight branch of enlightenment is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, the correct delight branch of enlightenment based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what the correct pliability branch of enlightenment is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, the correct pliability branch of enlightenment based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what the correct meditative stability branch of enlightenment is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, the correct meditative stability branch of enlightenment based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what the correct equanimity branch of enlightenment is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, the correct equanimity branch of enlightenment based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. This too, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the noble eightfold path. If you ask what the noble eightfold path is, it is correct view, correct thought, correct speech, correct action, correct livelihood, correct effort, correct mindfulness, and correct meditative stability. If, among them, you ask what correct view is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, correct view based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If, among them, you ask what correct thought is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, correct thought based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what correct speech is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, correct speech based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what correct action is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, correct action based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what correct livelihood is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, correct livelihood based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what correct effort is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, correct effort based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what correct mindfulness is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, correct mindfulness based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. If you ask what correct meditative stability is, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they cultivate, by way of not apprehending it, correct meditative stability based on seclusion, based on detachment, based on cessation, and maturing in release. This too, Subhūti, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the three meditative stabilities. If you ask what these three are, they are the meditative stability of emptiness, the meditative stability of signlessness, and the meditative stability of wishlessness. In this regard, if you ask what the meditative stability of emptiness is, that stability of mind when all phenomena are understood analytically to be empty of their own defining characteristics is the emptiness gateway to liberation called the meditative stability of emptiness. In this regard, if you ask what the meditative stability of signlessness is, that stability of mind when all phenomena are understood analytically to be devoid of signs is the signlessness gateway to liberation called the meditative stability of signlessness. In this regard, if you ask what the meditative stability of wishlessness is, that stability of mind when not conditioning any karma because ‘all phenomena cannot be conditioned by karma’ is the wishlessness gateway to liberation called the meditative stability of wishlessness. They should be mindful of these three gateways to liberation, without becoming discouraged. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the eleven knowledges. If you ask what these eleven are, they are knowledge of suffering, knowledge of the origin, knowledge of the cessation, knowledge of the path, knowledge of the extinction, knowledge that contaminants will not arise again, knowledge of phenomena, knowledge of phenomena that is subsequently realized, knowledge of the conventional, knowledge of mastery, and knowledge in accord with sound. 
“In this regard, if you ask what knowledge of suffering is, it is the knowledge that suffering does not arise. In this regard, if you ask what knowledge of the origin is, it is the knowledge that the origin has been eliminated. In this regard, if you ask what knowledge of the cessation is, it is the knowledge that suffering has ceased. In this regard, if you ask what knowledge of the path is, it is the knowledge of the noble eightfold path. In this regard, if you ask what knowledge of the extinction is, it is the knowledge that desire, hatred, and delusion have been extinguished. In this regard, if you ask what knowledge of nonregeneration is, it is the knowledge that the continuum of suffering existence will not be regenerated. If you ask what knowledge of phenomena is, it is the knowledge that fully understands that the five aggregates are illusory.
“If you ask what knowledge of phenomena that is subsequently realized is, it is the knowledge that the eyes are impermanent, the knowledge that the ears are impermanent, the knowledge that the nose is impermanent, the knowledge that the tongue is impermanent, the knowledge that the body is impermanent, and the knowledge that the mental faculty is impermanent; the knowledge that sights are impermanent, the knowledge that sounds are impermanent, the knowledge that odors are impermanent, the knowledge that tastes are impermanent, the knowledge that tangibles are impermanent, and the knowledge that mental phenomena are impermanent; the knowledge that the sensory element of the eyes is impermanent, the knowledge that the sensory element of sights is impermanent, and the knowledge that the sensory element of visual consciousness is impermanent; the knowledge that the sensory element of the ears is impermanent, the knowledge that the sensory element of sounds is impermanent, and the knowledge that the sensory element of auditory consciousness is impermanent; the knowledge that the sensory element of the nose is impermanent, the knowledge that the sensory element of odors is impermanent, and the knowledge that the sensory element of olfactory consciousness is impermanent; the knowledge that the sensory element of the tongue is impermanent, the knowledge that the sensory element of tastes is impermanent, and the knowledge that the sensory element of gustatory consciousness is impermanent; the knowledge that the sensory element of the body is impermanent, the knowledge that the sensory element of tangibles is impermanent, and the knowledge that the sensory element of tactile consciousness is impermanent; the knowledge that the sensory element of the mental faculty is impermanent, the knowledge that the sensory element of phenomena is impermanent, and the knowledge that the sensory element of mental consciousness is impermanent; and the knowledge that ignorance is impermanent, the knowledge that formative predispositions are impermanent, the knowledge that consciousness is impermanent, the knowledge that name and form are impermanent, the knowledge that the six sense fields are impermanent, and the knowledge that contact is impermanent; the knowledge that sensation is impermanent, the knowledge that craving is impermanent, the knowledge that grasping is impermanent, the knowledge that the rebirth process is impermanent, the knowledge that birth is impermanent, and the knowledge that aging and death are impermanent.
“If you ask what knowledge of the conventional is, it is the knowledge, through the mind, of the minds of other beings and of other persons. If you ask what knowledge that is masterful is, it is that by which there is knowledge of the path and knowledge of mastery. If you ask what knowledge of semantics is, it is the transcendental knowledge of an all-aspect omniscient one that the tathāgatas have. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the three faculties. If you ask what these three are, they are the faculty of coming to understand what one has not yet understood, the faculty of fully understanding, and the faculty of knowing one has fully understood.
“If you ask what the faculty of coming to understand what one has not yet understood is, the faculty of faith, the faculty of perseverance, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of meditative stability, and the faculty of wisdom of those trainees who are individuals without realization—which have not appeared—are called the faculty of coming to understand what one has not yet understood.
“If you ask what the faculty of fully understanding is, the faculty of faith, the faculty of perseverance, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of meditative stability, and the faculty of wisdom of those trainees who are individuals who have comprehension are called the faculty of fully understanding.
“If you ask what the faculty of knowing one has fully understood is, the faculty of faith, the faculty of perseverance, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of meditative stability, and the faculty of wisdom of those not in training who are arhats, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, or tathāgatas, Subhūti, are called the faculty of knowing one has fully understood. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the three meditative stabilities. If you ask what these three are, they are the meditative stability with an initial mental application and with a sustained mental application, the meditative stability without an initial mental application but with just a sustained mental application, and the meditative stability without an initial mental application and without a sustained mental application.
“In this regard, Subhūti, if you ask what the meditative stability with an initial mental application and with a sustained mental application is, bodhisattva great beings achieve and then maintain the first meditative concentration that is detached from sense objects, detached from negative and nonvirtuous attributes, has an initial mental application and a sustained mental application, and is endowed with the joy and the bliss that arise from detachment. This is the meditative stability with an initial mental application and with a sustained mental application.
“In this regard, if you ask what the meditative stability without an initial mental application but with just a sustained mental application is, between the first meditative concentration and the second meditative concentration is the meditative stability without an initial mental application but with just a sustained mental application.
“In this regard, if you ask what the meditative stability without an initial mental application and without a sustained mental application is, the second meditative concentration, the third meditative concentration, the fourth meditative concentration, the meditative absorption into the sphere of infinite space, the meditative absorption into the sphere of infinite consciousness, the meditative absorption into the sphere of nothing-at-all, the meditative absorption into the sphere of neither perception nor nonperception, and the meditative absorption into the cessation of perceptions and feelings are called the meditative stability without an initial mental application and without a sustained mental application. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the ten mindfulnesses. If you ask what these ten are, they are the mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of ethical discipline, mindfulness of giving away, mindfulness of the gods, mindfulness of disillusionment, mindfulness of the inhalation and exhalation of breath, mindfulness of death, and mindfulness of the body. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable attitudes, the four formless absorptions, the eight liberations, and the nine serial steps of meditative absorption. 
“If, among them, you ask what the four meditative concentrations are, in this regard, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they achieve and maintain the first meditative concentration that is detached from sense objects, detached from negative and nonvirtuous attributes, has an initial mental application and a sustained mental application, and is endowed with the joy and the bliss that arise from detachment. Having pacified the initial mental application and the sustained mental application, with inner serene confidence, which is to say, a mind that has become single-pointed, they achieve and maintain the second meditative concentration endowed with the joy and bliss that arise from meditative stability. On account of having no attachment to the joy, dwelling with mindfulness and alertness in equanimity they experience the bliss with their bodies and achieve and maintain the third meditative concentration devoid of joy, about which the ārya beings say, ‘They are mindful, abiding in bliss, and equanimous.’ On account of having earlier abandoned the bliss, abandoned suffering, and caused mental happiness and mental unhappiness to subside, with equanimity and mindfulness they achieve and maintain, by way of not apprehending anything, the utterly pure fourth meditative concentration without bliss and suffering. These are the four meditative concentrations.
“If, among them, you ask what the four immeasurable attitudes are, in this regard, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they permeate the world systems in the ten directions, within the whole infinity of the realm of phenomena and the very reaches of space, with a mind endowed with loving kindness that is vast, extensive, nondual, immeasurable, without enmity, free from harm, without rivalry, perfected, and well cultivated, remaining intent on and maintaining it. They permeate the world systems in the ten directions, within the whole infinity of the realm of phenomena and the very reaches of space, with a mind endowed with compassion that is vast, extensive, nondual, immeasurable, without enmity, free from harm, without rivalry, perfected, and well cultivated, remaining intent on and maintaining it. They permeate the world systems in the ten directions, within the whole infinity of the realm of phenomena and the very reaches of space, with a mind endowed with empathetic joy that is vast, extensive, nondual, immeasurable, without enmity, free from harm, without rivalry, perfected, and well cultivated, remaining intent on and maintaining it. They permeate the world systems in the ten directions, within the whole infinity of the realm of phenomena and the very reaches of space, with a mind endowed with equanimity that is vast, extensive, nondual, immeasurable, without enmity, free from harm, without rivalry, perfected, and well cultivated, remaining intent on and maintaining it, by way of not apprehending anything. These are the four immeasurable attitudes.
“If, among them, you ask what the four formless absorptions are, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, having completely transcended the perception of physical forms in all respects so that perceptions of obstruction have subsided, they do not direct their attention to diverse perceptions and achieve and maintain the sphere of infinite space, thinking, ‘Space is infinite.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of infinite space in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of infinite consciousness in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of nothing-at-all, thinking, ‘There is nothing at all.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of nothing-at-all in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of neither perception nor nonperception. These are the four formless absorptions.
“If, among them, you ask what the eight liberations are, those with physical forms observe physical forms. This is the first liberation. Those with the perception of no internal physical forms observe external physical forms. This is the second liberation. They are intent on pleasant states. This is the third liberation. Having completely transcended the perception of physical forms in all respects so that perceptions of obstruction have subsided, those who do not direct their attention to diverse perceptions achieve and maintain the sphere of infinite space, thinking, ‘Space is infinite.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of infinite space in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of infinite consciousness in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of nothing-at-all, thinking, ‘There is nothing at all.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of nothing-at-all in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of neither perception nor nonperception. Having completely transcended the sphere of neither perception nor nonperception in all respects, they achieve and maintain the cessation of perceptions and feelings, by way of not apprehending anything. Those are the eight liberations. 
“If, among them, you ask what the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they achieve and maintain the first meditative concentration that is detached from sense objects, detached from negative and nonvirtuous attributes, has an initial mental application and a sustained mental application, and is endowed with the joy and the bliss that arise from detachment. Having pacified the initial mental application and the sustained mental application, with inner serene confidence—which is to say, a mind that has become single-pointed—they achieve and maintain the second meditative concentration endowed with the joy and bliss that arise from meditative stability. On account of having no attachment to the joy, dwelling with mindfulness and alertness in equanimity they experience the bliss with their bodies and achieve and maintain the third meditative concentration devoid of joy about which the ārya beings say, ‘They are mindful, abiding in bliss, and equanimous.’ On account of having earlier abandoned the bliss, abandoned suffering, and caused mental happiness and mental unhappiness to subside, with equanimity and mindfulness they achieve and maintain the utterly pure fourth meditative concentration without bliss and suffering. Having completely transcended the perception of physical forms in all respects so that perceptions of obstruction have subsided, they do not direct their attention to diverse perceptions and achieve and maintain the sphere of infinite space, thinking, ‘Space is infinite.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of infinite space in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of infinite consciousness in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of nothing-at-all, thinking, ‘There is nothing at all.’ Having completely transcended the sphere of nothing-at-all in all respects, they achieve and maintain the sphere of neither perception nor nonperception. Having completely transcended the sphere of neither perception nor nonperception in all respects, they achieve and maintain the cessation of perceptions and feelings, by way of not apprehending anything. Those are the nine serial steps of meditative absorption. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the ten powers of the tathāgatas. If you ask what these ten are, in this regard, Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they have definitive knowledge that phenomena that are possible are indeed possible, and definitive knowledge that phenomena that are impossible are indeed impossible. 
“They have definitive knowledge of the maturation, the aspect of location, and the aspect of cause of past, future, and present actions and the undertakings of action.
“They have definitive knowledge that a world has a diversity of constituents, that a world has multiple constituents.
“They have definitive knowledge of the diversity of inclinations and the multiplicity of inclinations that other beings, other persons, have.
“They have definitive knowledge of the acumen of other beings, other persons, which is to be known as superior or inferior. 
“They have definitive knowledge of the paths, wherever they lead.
“They have definitive knowledge of the faculties, powers, branches of enlightenment, meditative concentrations, liberations, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions, and defiled and purified states.
“They recollect multiple past abodes. Recollecting one lifetime, they recollect a hundred lifetimes, a thousand lifetimes, a hundred thousand lifetimes, ten million lifetimes, a hundred ten million lifetimes, a thousand ten million lifetimes, a hundred thousand ten million lifetimes, and a hundred thousand ten million billion lifetimes. Recollecting one eon, they recollect a hundred eons, a thousand eons, a hundred thousand eons, up to a hundred thousand ten million billion eons. They recollect multiple past abodes: ‘I was in such-and-such a place, named so-and-so, in such-and-such a lineage, with such-and-such a birth status, following such-and-such a diet, with an allotted lifespan of such-and-such a duration, living for such-and-such a length of time. Thus, having died there I was born in such-and-such places, up to and having died there then I took birth here,’ along with the conditions, the bare ground on which the corpses were laid, and the reasons. 
“They know through their refined divine eye of clairvoyance surpassing that of humans those beings who are dying and those who are reborn; they know the extent to which they proceed in accord with their actions—those who are beautiful, those who are ugly, those who are excellent, those who are vile, those who dwell in blissful realms, and those who dwell in the lower realms. They know: ‘These beings have misconduct of body, these have misconduct of speech, these have misconduct of mind, these deprecate sublime beings, and these have wrong views, and, because of those causes and those conditions, when they have died they will be reborn in inferior realms, falling into the lower abodes, as denizens of the hells. These beings have noble conduct of body, these have noble conduct of speech, these have noble conduct of mind, these do not deprecate sublime beings, and these have correct views, and, because of those causes and those conditions, when they have died they will reborn among the gods of the blissful and exalted realms.’
“Through their own extrasensory powers they have actualized, achieved, and dwell in the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free of contaminants because all contaminants have ceased. They have definitive knowledge that, ‘My rebirths have come to an end. I have lived the holy life. I have done what needed to be done. I will experience no other rebirths apart from this one.’ 
“This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the four fearlessnesses. If you ask what these four are, when I claim to have attained perfectly complete buddhahood, I observe no reason for any virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else here in the world to argue in accordance with the Dharma that these are not manifestly enlightened qualities, and, because I do not see any reason, I dwell in a feeling of security about that, without trepidation, with fearlessness. I claim my exalted place as the great leader. I rightly roar the lion’s roar in the midst of the assembly. I turn the wheel of Brahmā that no one in the world—no virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else—can turn in accordance with the Dharma.
“When I claim that I am one whose contaminants have ceased, I observe no reason for any virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else here in the world to argue with me in accordance with the Dharma that those contaminants have not ceased, and, because I do not see any reason, I dwell in a feeling of security about that, without trepidation, with fearlessness. I claim my exalted place as the great leader. I rightly roar the lion’s roar in the midst of the assembly. I turn the wheel of Brahmā that no one in the world—no virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else—can turn in accordance with the Dharma.
“For any of those phenomena I have explained to be obstacles, it is impossible that, having resorted to them, such phenomena as those would not become obstacles. Therefore, I observe no reason for any virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else here in the world to argue about that with me in accordance with the Dharma, and, because I do not see any reason, I dwell in a feeling of security about that, without trepidation, with fearlessness. I claim my exalted place as the great leader. I rightly roar the lion’s roar in the midst of the assembly. I turn the wheel of Brahmā that no one in the world—no virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else—can turn in accordance with the Dharma.
“For those paths of the noble ones that I have taught, conducive to emancipation and realization and the genuine cessation of suffering, it is impossible to say that it will not be the case that suffering will genuinely cease for those who have practiced them. Therefore, I observe no reason for any virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else here in the world to argue about that with me in accordance with the Dharma, and, because I do not see any reason, I dwell in a feeling of security about that, without trepidation, with fearlessness. I claim my exalted place as the great leader. I rightly roar the lion’s roar in the midst of the assembly. I turn the wheel of Brahmā that no one in the world—no virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else—can turn in accordance with the Dharma.
“This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is also the four kinds of exact knowledge. If you ask what these four are, they are the exact knowledge of meanings, the exact knowledge of dharmas, the exact knowledge of lexical explanations, and the exact knowledge of inspired eloquence. This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. If you ask what these eighteen are, from the night when the tathāgatas fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete enlightenment until when—having taught the path whereby living creatures, including gods, demons, Brahmās, virtuous ascetics, and brahmin priests, along with gods, humans, and asuras, put an end to suffering—they attain final nirvāṇa in the expanse of nirvāṇa with no residual aggregates, the tathāgatas are without clumsiness; they are not noisy; their memory does not degenerate; they are without differentiating perceptions; they are without uncomposed minds; they are without the indifference that lacks discernment; they do not degenerate in their resolution; they do not degenerate in their perseverance; they do not degenerate in their mindfulness; they do not degenerate in their meditative stability; they do not degenerate in their wisdom; they do not degenerate in their liberation nor do they degenerate in their knowledge and seeing of liberation; all the activities of their bodies are preceded by transcendental knowledge and informed by transcendental knowledge; all the activities of their speech are preceded by transcendental knowledge and informed by transcendental knowledge; all the activities of their minds are preceded by transcendental knowledge and informed by transcendental knowledge; their unobstructed and unimpeded transcendental knowledge and seeing engages with the past; their unobstructed and unimpeded transcendental knowledge and seeing engages with the future; and their unobstructed and unimpeded transcendental knowledge and seeing engages with the present. 
“This too, Subhūti, by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is the dhāraṇī gateways—that is to say, the sameness of letters, the sameness of explanations, the letters as gateways, and the entrance through letters. Among them, if you ask what the letters as gateways and entrance through letters are, the a is the gateway to all phenomena, because they have not arisen (anutpannatvād). The ra is the gateway to all phenomena, because they are without dirt (rajas). The pa is the gateway to all phenomena, because it indicates the ultimate (paramārtha). The tsa is the gateway to all phenomena, because death (cyavana) and rebirth are not apprehended so all phenomena do not die and are not reborn. The na is the gateway to all phenomena, because they are separated from names (nāman) and an intrinsic nature of names is not acquired or lost. The la is the gateway to all phenomena, because they are supramundane (lokottara) and the causes and conditions giving rise to the creeping vine (latā) of craving are utterly destroyed. The da is the gateway to all phenomena, because being disciplined (dānta) and disciplined abiding (damatha) are determined. The ba is the gateway to all phenomena, because they are free from bondage (bandhana). The ḍa is the gateway to all phenomena, because they are free from agitation (ḍamara). The ṣa is the gateway to all phenomena, because there is no attachment (saṅga) and no bondage because attachment cannot be apprehended. The va is the gateway to all phenomena, because the pathway and sounds of speech (vākpatha) have been interrupted. The ta is the gateway to all phenomena, because they do not waver from the real nature (tathatā). The ya is the gateway to all phenomena, because they cannot be apprehended definitively (yathāvat). The sta is the gateway to all phenomena, because boasting (stambha) is not apprehended. The ka is the gateway to all phenomena, because agents (kāraka) are not apprehended. The sa is the gateway to all phenomena, because they have not transgressed sameness (samatā) because sameness is not apprehended. The ma is the gateway to all phenomena, because the notion of ‘mine’ (ma
makāra) is not apprehended. The ga is the gateway to all phenomena, because motion (gamana) is not apprehended. The [s]tha is the gateway to all phenomena, because abodes ([s]thāna) are not apprehended. The dza is the gateway to all phenomena, because birth (jāti) is not apprehended. The shva is the gateway to all phenomena, because the life breath (śvāsa) is not apprehended. The dha is the gateway to all phenomena, because the realm of phenomena (dharma) is not apprehended. The sha is the gateway to all phenomena, because calm abiding (śamatha) is not apprehended. The kha is the gateway to all phenomena, because phenomena are not apprehended owing to the sameness of space (kha). The kṣa is the gateway to all phenomena, because extinction (kṣaya) is not apprehended. The sta is the gateway to all phenomena, because eulogies (stotra) are not apprehended. The dznya is the gateway to all phenomena, because transcendental knowledge (jñāna) is not apprehended. The rta is the gateway to all phenomena, because afflictive mental states (arti) are not apprehended. The ha is the gateway to all phenomena, because causes (hetu) are not apprehended. The bha is the gateway to all phenomena, because there is no fear (bhaya). The cha is the gateway to all phenomena, because a complexion (chavi) is not apprehended. The sma is the gateway to all phenomena, because memory (smaraṇa) is not apprehended. The hva is the gateway to all phenomena, because appellations (āhvāna) are not apprehended. The tsa
is the gateway to all phenomena, because resolution (utsāha) is not apprehended. The gha is the gateway to all phenomena, because density (ghana) is not apprehended. The tha is the gateway to all phenomena, because fabrications (viṭhapana) are not apprehended. The ṇa is the gateway to all phenomena, because, since there is no conflict (raṇa), nothing goes or comes, stands or sits, or rests, or thinks conceptually. The pha is the gateway to all phenomena, because fruits (phala) are not apprehended. The ska is the gateway to all phenomena, because the aggregates (skandha) are not apprehended. The ysa is the gateway to all phenomena, because unhappiness (yskara) is not apprehended. The tsa is the gateway to all phenomena, because conduct (caraṇa) is not apprehended. The ḍa is the gateway to all phenomena, because suffering (*ḍadakara) is not apprehended. The ḍha is the gateway to all phenomena, because, since a covering (ḍhakana) is not apprehended, ultimately there is neither death and transmigration nor rebirth.
“There is no conventional usage of letters above these. If you ask why, it is because there exist no sorts of names at all by which anything could be conventionally designated, by which anything could be expressed, by which anything could be taught, by which anything could be written, by which anything could be seen, or by which anything could be recited aloud.
“Subhūti, all phenomena should be understood to resemble space. Subhūti, this is the entrance through the dhāraṇī gateways, the entrance through the explanation of the letters, beginning with a. Subhūti, if any bodhisattva great beings comprehend this expertise with respect to the letters, beginning with a, they will not be attached to any sounds, they will accomplish all as the reality of phenomena, and they will acquire skill in the cognition of sounds. 
“Subhūti, you should know there are twenty advantages for those bodhisattva great beings who have heard this seal of entrance through the letters a and so on, and these words that are the seal of entrance through the letters a and so on, and who, having heard them, also take them up, hold them in mind, recite them aloud, and master and demonstrate them to others with the proper understanding. If you ask what these twenty are, they are as follows:
“They will be mindful, intelligent, understanding, clever, joyful, modest, and inspired. They will acquire this dhāraṇī gateway without feeling afflicted and will not be hesitant, will not be attached upon hearing the sweet words of others, and they will not be angered upon hearing harsh words, so that they will dwell in the correct way, neither high nor low. They will be skilled in words. They will be skilled with respect to the aggregates. They will be skilled with respect to the sensory elements. They will be skilled with respect to the sense fields. They will be skilled with respect to the truths. They will be skilled with respect to dependent origination, which is to say, skilled with respect to causes and skilled with respect to conditions. They will be skilled with respect to the reality of phenomena. They will be skilled in knowledge of those of high and low acumen. They will be skilled in knowledge of death and rebirth. They will be skilled in knowledge of clairaudience. They will be skilled in knowledge of others’ minds. They will be skilled in knowledge of recollecting past lives. They will be skilled in knowledge of miraculous abilities. They will be skilled in knowledge of the extinction of contaminants. They will be skilled in knowledge of that which is possible and that which is impossible. They will be skilled in going out and skilled in returning. They will be skilled in conduct. They will also acquire skill in matters of shame and conscience. 
“This too, Subhūti, this entrance through the dhāraṇī gateways––the letters a and so on––by way of not apprehending anything, is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.”
This completes the ninth chapter from The Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand Lines. 
Chapter 10
“Subhūti, you have asked, ‘How have bodhisattva great beings entered perfectly into the Great Vehicle?’ In this regard, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings practice the six perfections and progress from level to level. Subhūti, if you ask how bodhisattva great beings practice the six perfections and progress from level to level, it is like this: no phenomenon changes place, so no phenomenon at all goes or comes, changes place, or draws near. However, while they do not give rise to conceits or think about the level of any phenomena, it is not that they do not refine the levels, it is that they do not observe those levels.
“If you ask what the bodhisattva great beings’ refinement of a level is, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who dwell on the first level should make ten refinements to that level. If you ask what these ten are, they are the refinement of sincere resolve, and so on, without apprehending them; the refinement of beneficial states by not apprehending signs, and the refinement of the sameness of attitude to all beings by not apprehending beings; the refinement of giving things away by not apprehending a gift, a giver, or a recipient; the refinement of the service to spiritual mentors by the lack of conceit about it; the refinement of the search for the Dharma by not apprehending any Dharma; the refinement of going forth to homelessness again and again by not apprehending a home; the refinement of the wish for the body of a buddha by not apprehending the major and minor marks; the refinement of the exposition of the Dharma by not apprehending divisions of Dharma; the refinement of the elimination of pride and arrogance by not apprehending the true existence of phenomena; and the refinement of words of truth by not apprehending words. Subhūti, these are the ten refinements that should be made by bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the first level.
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who dwell on the second level should pay repeated attention to eight attributes and apply themselves to them earnestly. If you ask what these eight are, they are purity of ethical discipline, gratitude and thankfulness, being grounded in the power of tolerance, experiencing delight and joy, not forsaking any being, actualizing great compassion, serving spiritual teachers and venerating them with faith, and striving and seeking for the perfections. Subhūti, these are the eight attributes to which bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the second level should pay attention and earnestly apply themselves. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who dwell on the third level should maintain five attributes. If you ask what these five are, they should maintain an insatiable thirst for erudition but without a fixation on letters; the elucidation of the gift of the Dharma without expectations, but without giving rise to conceit about it; the generation and dedication of the roots of virtue for the refinement of a buddhafield but without giving rise to conceit about it; indefatigability in the face of the immeasurable cycles of rebirth but without giving rise to conceit about it; and a sense of shame and conscience but without giving rise to conceit about them. Subhūti, these are the five attributes that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the third level should maintain. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who dwell on the fourth level should adopt and maintain ten attributes, without forsaking them. If you ask what these ten are, they are dwelling in a forest, a paucity of desires, contentment, not forsaking the restrictions associated with asceticism, not forsaking the training, spurning the desirable attributes of the senses, developing a mindset associated with nirvāṇa, forsaking all property, undauntedness, and disregard for all entities. Subhūti, these are the ten attributes that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the fourth level should not forsake, but that they should adopt and maintain. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the fifth level should avoid six things. If you ask what these six are, they should avoid intimacy with householders, intimacy with nuns, being envious of families, places of social intercourse, bearing malice, self-praise, and disparagement of others. These are the six things that should be avoided. There are eighteen further things they should avoid. They should avoid the paths of the ten nonvirtuous actions, pride in being superior, haughtiness, distorted views, doubt, and not rejecting patience for desire, hatred, and delusion. These are the eighteen further things that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the fifth level should avoid.
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the sixth level should perfect six things, namely, the six perfections. They should, moreover, avoid six things. If you ask what these six are, they should avoid the mindset of the śrāvakas; they should avoid the mindset of the pratyekabuddhas; they should avoid a mind that has craving; they should not feel discouraged when they see beggars—that is to say, they should avoid a mind that is discouraged; they should avoid feeling unhappy on account of having renounced all material things—that is to say, they should avoid unhappiness; and they should not feel disturbed when they see beggars—that is to say, they should avoid a mind that is disturbed. Subhūti, these are the six things that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the sixth level should avoid. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the seventh level should not do twenty things. If you ask what these twenty are, they should not grasp at a self, should not grasp at a being, should not grasp at an individual, and should not grasp at a person, they should not grasp at nihilism, and should not grasp at eternalism; they should not perceive signs, hold views about causes, be attached to name and form, be attached to the aggregates, be attached to the sensory elements, be attached to the sense fields, be attached to the three realms, be fixated on the three realms, rely on the three realms, or have the three realms as a foundation; and they should not be attached to the view of relying on the Buddha, be attached to the view of relying on the Dharma, be attached to the view of relying on the Saṅgha, be attached to the view of relying on ethical discipline, be discouraged by the fact that all phenomena are empty, or contradict emptiness. Subhūti, these are the twenty things that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the seventh level should not do.
“Therefore, there are also twenty things that they should perfect. If you ask what these twenty are, they are the completion of emptiness; the actualizing of signlessness; the understanding of wishlessness; the purity of the three spheres; compassion and pity for all beings; not feeling contempt for those beings; the view of the sameness of all phenomena; the penetrating understanding of the principle of reality without giving rise to conceit because of that; tolerance for nonarising; knowledge of nonarising; the teaching about the single principle of all phenomena; the perfect elimination of ideation; the reversal of views; the reversal of afflictive mental states; the level of stilling and higher insight; a disciplined mind; a peaceful mind; unimpeded transcendental knowledge; understanding of the appropriate circumstances for loving kindness; going to any buddhafield at will; and the displaying of their identities to all. Subhūti, these are the twenty things that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the seventh level should perfect. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who dwell on the eighth level should perfect four attributes. If you ask what these four are, they are comprehending the minds of all beings, playing with the extrasensory powers, seeing buddhafields and actualizing these buddhafields just as they have seen them, and venerating the buddhas along with definitive contemplation of the buddha bodies as they really are. Subhūti, these are the four attributes that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the eighth level should perfect.
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the eighth level should perfect four other attributes. If you ask what these four are, they are the knowledge of those of higher and lower acumen, refinement of a buddhafield, continuous absorption in illusion-like meditative stability, and intentionally taking rebirth in order to assume a body commensurate with the roots of virtue of beings. Subhūti, these are the four other attributes that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the eighth level should perfect. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the ninth level should perfect twelve attributes. If you ask what these twelve are, they are the acquisition of infinite aspirations and excellently accomplishing whatever aspirations they have; knowledge of the languages of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas; knowledge of expositions based on perfect inspired eloquence; excellence of the entry into the mother’s womb; excellence of family; excellence of class; excellence of clan; excellence of entourage; excellence of life; excellence of departure from home; excellence of the ornaments of the tree of enlightenment; and excellence of the completion of all good qualities. Subhūti, these are the twelve attributes that bodhisattva great beings dwelling on the ninth level should perfect. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings who dwell on the tenth level are said to be just tathāgatas.” 
The Blessed One having said this, the venerable Subhūti then asked him, “Blessed Lord, for bodhisattva great beings who dwell on the first level, what is the refinement of sincere resolve and so on?”
“Subhūti,” replied the Blessed One, “bodhisattva great beings correctly gather many roots of virtue by developing the intention connected with all-aspect omniscience. This is the refinement of the sincere resolve of bodhisattva great beings.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of beneficial states, it is the bodhisattva great beings’ search for, and achievement of, the knowledge of the Great Vehicle for the sake of all beings. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of beneficial states.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of the sameness of attitude with regard to all beings, it is the actualization of the four immeasurable attitudes—loving kindness, compassion, empathetic joy, and equanimity— by developing the intention connected with all-aspect omniscience. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of the sameness of attitude with regard to all beings.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of giving things away, it is the undertaking of acts of generosity for all beings without discrimination. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of giving things away.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of the service to spiritual mentors, it is serving, respecting, honoring, and worshiping those spiritual mentors of bodhisattva great beings who encourage, establish, and secure them in all-aspect omniscience. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of the service to spiritual mentors.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of the search for the Dharma, it is that by developing the intention connected with all-aspect omniscience, they search for the Dharma and do not fall to the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of the search for the Dharma.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of going forth to homelessness again and again, it is that throughout all their lives they avoid social intercourse, go forth to homelessness in the teaching of the tathāgatas, and indeed there is nothing at all that impedes them. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of going forth to homelessness again and again. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of the wish for the body of a buddha, it is that, having seen the body of a buddha, they will never be separated from attentiveness to the buddhas until they attain all-aspect omniscience. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of the wish for the body of a buddha.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of the exposition of the Dharma, it is that whether the tathāgatas are present or when they have passed into nirvāṇa, bodhisattva great beings teach beings the Dharma that is virtuous in the beginning, virtuous in the middle, and virtuous at the end, excellent in wording and excellent in meaning, distinct, complete, pure, refined, and about a holy life. That is to say, they correctly teach the discourses, the sayings in prose and verse, the prophetic declarations, the verses, the statements made for a purpose, the introductions, the accounts, the tales of past lives, the most extensive teachings, the marvelous events, the narratives, and the established instructions. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of the exposition of the Dharma.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of the elimination of pride and arrogance, it is that, on account of their elimination of pride and arrogance, they are never born in a lower-status family. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of the elimination of pride and arrogance.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of words of truth, it is that they do as they say. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refinement of words of truth. 
“Subhūti, these are the ten refinements of bodhisattva great beings who dwell on the first level.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the purity of ethical discipline, it is not paying attention to the mindsets of the śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, and, besides that, not paying attention to disciplines that would lead to immorality and impede the way to enlightenment. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the purity of ethical discipline. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is gratitude and thankfulness, it is that, when bodhisattva great beings practice the conduct of a bodhisattva, until saṃsāra has come to an end, they never squander any benefit done for them, however small, let alone a major one. For bodhisattva great beings, this is gratitude and thankfulness.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is being grounded in the power of tolerance, it is the absence of malice and inimical thoughts directed toward any being. For bodhisattva great beings, this is being grounded in the power of tolerance.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the experience of delight and joy, it is that they bring all beings to maturation in the three vehicles. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the experience of delight and joy.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is not forsaking any being, it is providing sanctuary to all beings. For bodhisattva great beings, this is not forsaking any being.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the actualizing of great compassion, it is that, when bodhisattva great beings practice the conduct of a bodhisattva, they think, ‘For the sake of each being I will remain among the denizens of the hells for eons numbering as many as the grains of sand of the river Gaṅgā, and until all beings are established in the transcendental knowledge of the buddhas, I will experience in these domains being cut, pierced, beaten, roasted, burned, and so on,’ all the while with delight and indefatigability for the sake of all beings. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the actualizing of great compassion.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is serving spiritual teachers and venerating them with faith, it is perceiving their spiritual teachers as buddhas. For bodhisattva great beings, this is serving spiritual teachers and venerating them with faith.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is striving and seeking for the perfections, it is that, in order to bring all beings to maturation, without doing anything else they search for the perfections, with no other activity. For bodhisattva great beings, this is striving and seeking for the perfections.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the insatiable thirst for erudition, it is the insatiability of thinking, ‘I will retain in mind all that the blessed lord buddhas have taught in this world system and in the world systems of all the ten directions.’ For bodhisattva great beings, this is the insatiable thirst for erudition.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the elucidation of the gift of the Dharma without expectations, it is that when bodhisattva great beings teach the Dharma, they do not hope even in the slightest for enlightenment through that gift of the Dharma. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the elucidation of the gift of the Dharma without expectations.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the generation and dedication of the roots of virtue for the refinement of a buddhafield, it is the dedication, when purifying the roots of virtue for a buddhafield, of those roots of virtue with which they purify the fields of their own and others’ minds. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the generation and dedication of the roots of virtue for the refinement of a buddhafield.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is indefatigability in the face of the immeasurable cycles of rebirth, it is that they never tire until they perfect all-aspect omniscience with the support of those roots of virtue that are the roots of virtue that, when they are relied on, bring beings to maturation and refine a buddhafield. For bodhisattva great beings, this is indefatigability in the face of the immeasurable cycles of rebirth. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is a sense of conscience and shame, it is spurning the mindsets of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. For bodhisattva great beings, this is a sense of conscience and shame.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refusal to give up dwelling in a forest, it is going beyond the levels of the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the refusal to give up dwelling in a forest.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the paucity of desires, it is that bodhisattva great beings do not have the desire even for enlightenment. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the paucity of desires.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is contentment, it is attaining all-aspect omniscience but without giving rise to conceit about it. For bodhisattva great beings, this is contentment.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is not forsaking the restrictions associated with asceticism, it is tolerance for establishing realization with respect to the profound phenomena. For bodhisattva great beings, this is not forsaking the restrictions associated with asceticism.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is not forsaking the training, it is being unwavering in the training. For bodhisattva great beings, this is not forsaking the training.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is spurning the desirable attributes of the senses, it is not setting their minds on the objects of the senses. For bodhisattva great beings, this is spurning the desirable attributes of the senses.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is developing a mindset associated with nirvāṇa, it is not engaging in the conditioning of any phenomena. For bodhisattva great beings, this is developing a mindset associated with nirvāṇa.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the forsaking of all property, it is not grasping any external or internal phenomena. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the forsaking of all property.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is undauntedness, it is that their minds do not dwell on states of consciousness. For bodhisattva great beings, this is undauntedness. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is disregard for all entities, it is that they do not pay attention to any entities. For bodhisattva great beings, this is disregard for all entities.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the avoidance of intimacy with householders, it is that they proceed from buddhafield to buddhafield, take birth miraculously, have shaved heads, and wear saffron robes. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of intimacy with householders.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the avoidance of intimacy with nuns, it is that they do not stay with a nun, even for the duration of a finger snap, and they do not have thoughts that thirst for them on that account. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of intimacy with nuns.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the avoidance of being envious of families, in this regard, Subhūti, it is that bodhisattva great beings should think, ‘I should work for the happiness of all beings, and, given that these beings are happy on account of their own merits, I should not have thoughts of envy toward them.’ For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of being envious of families.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should avoid places of social intercourse, bodhisattva great beings should not frequent any places of social intercourse where śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas are present, or where discussions might take place connected with them, or where their associated mindsets might arise. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of places of social intercourse.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should avoid malice, they provide no opportunity for thoughts of malice or harm, and no occasion for thinking about fighting or strife. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of malice.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the avoidance of self-praise, it is not observing internal or external phenomena. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of self-praise.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the avoidance of disparaging others, it is not observing external phenomena. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of disparaging others. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should avoid the paths of the ten nonvirtuous actions, they avoid them since they should be avoided because they obstruct progress to the higher realms, not to mention to the path of the noble ones, and not to mention to unsurpassed, perfect, complete enlightenment. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of the paths of the ten nonvirtuous actions.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should avoid pride in being superior, they do not feel pride because they do not observe anything at all, let alone a superiority on account of which they would feel pride. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of pride in being superior.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should avoid haughtiness, they do not observe any entity with respect to which haughtiness might arise. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of haughtiness.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should avoid distorted views, they do not apprehend entities. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of distorted views.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should avoid being of two minds, it is because they see all phenomena free from doubts. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the avoidance of being of two minds.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings do not reject patience for desire, hatred, and delusion, it is because they do not observe desire, hatred, or delusion. For bodhisattva great beings, this is not rejecting patience for desire, hatred, and delusion.
“If, among them, you ask what are the six attributes that should be perfected on the sixth level, they are the six perfections—that is to say, the perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of meditative concentration, and the perfection of wisdom should be perfected. If you ask why, it is because, while abiding in these six perfections, the blessed lord buddhas, the śrāvakas, and the pratyekabuddhas have gone, are going, and will go to the other shore of the five oceans of objects of knowledge.
“If you ask what are these five, they are the past, the future, the present, the inexpressible, and the unconditioned. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should perfect the six perfections.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should avoid the six attributes, it is that they should avoid the mindset of the śrāvakas because it is not the path to enlightenment; they should avoid the mindset of the pratyekabuddhas because it is not the path to enlightenment; they should avoid a mind that has craving because it is not the path to enlightenment; they should not feel discouraged when they see beggars because it is not the path to enlightenment; they should not be unhappy on account of having renounced all material things because it is not the path to enlightenment; and that from generating the first mind set on enlightenment they should undertake acts of generosity but should not be in a greedy state of mind because it is not the path to enlightenment. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should avoid these six attributes.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not grasp at a self, it is because the self is absolutely nonexistent. If you ask how they should not grasp at a being, it is because a being is absolutely nonexistent. If you ask how they should not grasp at an individual, it is because an individual is absolutely nonexistent. If you ask how they should not grasp at a person, it is because a person is absolutely nonexistent. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not grasp at nihilism, it is because no phenomenon at all is annihilated since all phenomena have absolutely not arisen. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not grasp at eternalism, it is because any phenomenon that has not arisen is not eternal, nor is it annihilated. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not perceive signs, it is because defilement is absolutely nonexistent.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not hold views about causes, it is because they do not observe those views. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to name and form, it is because they do not observe that entity. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the aggregates, it is because the aggregates are absolutely nonexistent. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the aggregates. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the sensory elements, it is because the sensory elements are absolutely nonexistent. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the sensory elements. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the sense fields, it is because the sense fields are absolutely nonexistent. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the sense fields.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the three realms, it is because their essential nature is nonexistent. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the three realms. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be fixated on the three realms, it is because their entity does not exist and cannot be apprehended. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be fixated on the three realms.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not rely on the three realms, it is because their entity does not exist and cannot be apprehended. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not rely on the three realms.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not have the three realms as a foundation, it is because their entity does not exist and cannot be apprehended. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not have the three realms as a foundation.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the view of relying on the Buddha, it is because, by resorting to a view of the Buddha they will not see the Buddha. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the view of relying on the Buddha. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the view of relying on the Dharma, it is because, by resorting to a view of the Dharma they will not see the Dharma. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the view of relying on the Dharma.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the view of relying on the Saṅgha, it is because, by resorting to a view of the Saṅgha they will not see the Saṅgha. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the view of relying on the Saṅgha.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the view of relying on ethical discipline, it is because, by resorting to a view of ethical discipline, ethical discipline will not be purified. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be attached to the view of relying on ethical discipline. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not be discouraged by the fact that all phenomena are empty, it is because all phenomena are not empty of emptiness but empty of their own defining characteristics. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not be discouraged by emptiness.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should not contradict emptiness, it is because all phenomena are empty and therefore emptiness does not contradict emptiness. So it is that bodhisattva great beings should not contradict emptiness.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should perfect emptiness, the perfection of the emptiness of its own defining characteristics is, for bodhisattva great beings, the perfection of emptiness. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings should actualize signlessness, it is because they do not pay attention to any signs.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings understand wishlessness, it is that they do not engage the mind in any of the three realms. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings purify the three spheres, it is that they perfect the path of the ten virtuous actions.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings perfect compassion and pity for all beings, it is that they acquire great compassion. 
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings do not feel contempt for all beings, it is that they perfect loving kindness. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the view of the sameness of all phenomena, it is that phenomena neither increase nor decrease. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the penetrating understanding of the principle of reality, it is that even though they understand all phenomena in a single principle, there is no understanding.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is tolerance for nonarising, it is tolerance for all phenomena that are nonarising, not ceasing, and not conditioned. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is knowledge of nonarising, it is the knowledge that name and form do not arise. For bodhisattva great beings, this is knowledge of nonarising.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the teaching about the single principle of all phenomena, it is the absence of habitual ideas about duality. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the teaching about the single principle of all phenomena.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the perfect elimination of ideation, it is the absence of conceptual thought with respect to all phenomena. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the reversal of views, it is that they have abandoned the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyekabuddhas. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the reversal of afflictive mental states, it is that they have put an end to all the propensities for afflicted mental states that cause linking up.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the level of stilling and higher insight, it is the transcendental knowledge of one with all-aspect omniscience. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is a disciplined mind, it is feeling no delight for the three realms.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is a peaceful mind, it is when the six sense faculties are gathered in together. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is unimpeded transcendental knowledge, it is that they acquire the eye of the buddhas. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is understanding the appropriate circumstances for loving kindness, it is an equanimity with regard to the six sense fields.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is going to any buddhafield at will, it is, without moving from any one buddhafield, being seen in all buddhafields.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the displaying of their identities to all, it is that they display to their respective entourages what they delight in––this or that identity as whatever is delightful.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the comprehension of the minds of all beings, it is that with a single mind they cognize the minds and mental factors of all beings. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is playing with the extrasensory powers, it is playing with their extrasensory powers and moving from buddhafield to buddhafield in order to behold the buddhas, but not having any notion of a buddha.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is seeing buddhafields, it is that they may be present in one buddhafield and see inestimable buddhafields, but they do not have any notion of a buddhafield.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the actualization of the buddhafields just as they have seen them, it is that they dwell on the level of a wheel-turning emperor, or a ruler of a great billionfold world system, but they renounce the great billionfold world system and give rise to no conceit about it. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the veneration of the buddhas, it is that they venerate the Dharma in order to benefit all beings.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the definitive contemplation of the buddha bodies as they really are, it is the definitive contemplation of the Dharma body as it really is.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the knowledge of those with higher and lower acumen, it is maintaining the ten powers and knowing the perfection of the acumen of all beings. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the refinement of a buddhafield, it is the refinement of the minds of all beings by way of not apprehending anything. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is illusion-like meditative stability, it is that meditative stability by maintaining which bodhisattva great beings perform all the activities but without their minds engaging with any phenomenon.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is continuous meditative absorption, it is the meditative stability that has arisen from the maturation of bodhisattva great beings.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is assuming a body commensurate with the roots of virtue that beings establish, it is bodhisattva great beings intentionally assuming a body commensurate with the maturation of beings.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is intentionally taking rebirth, it is in order to bring beings to maturation.
“If, among them, you ask how it is that whatever aspirations bodhisattva great beings have, they excellently accomplish them, here, because bodhisattva great beings have perfected the six perfections there is an excellent accomplishment of whatever aspirations they have.
“If, among them, you ask how bodhisattva great beings comprehend the languages of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas that are to be known, it is that they comprehend them by means of the exact knowledge of lexical explanations.
“If, among them, you ask how it is that bodhisattva great beings understand the expositions based on perfect inspired eloquence that are to be known, they comprehend them with their exact knowledge of inspired eloquence. 
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the excellence of the entry into the mother’s womb, here, it is that bodhisattva great beings are born miraculously in all their lives. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the excellence of the entry into the mother’s womb.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the excellence of family, it is that bodhisattva great beings are born into great families. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the excellence of family.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the excellence of class, it is that bodhisattva great beings are born in a great and lofty royal family or in a great and lofty priestly family. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the excellence of class.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the excellence of clan, it is that bodhisattva great beings are born into the families in which bodhisattva great beings of the past have appeared. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the excellence of clan.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the excellence of entourage, it is that bodhisattva great beings have established beings in enlightenment and have just an entourage of bodhisattvas. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the excellence of entourage.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the excellence of life, it is that immediately after their birth, bodhisattva great beings fill the world systems with their effulgence, causing them to shake in six ways. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the excellence of life.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the excellence of departure from home, it is that bodhisattva great beings leave home along with many one hundred thousand hundred million billion beings in order to become those who have gone forth to homelessness, and that those beings also become assured in the three vehicles. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the excellence of departure from home.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the excellence of the ornaments of the tree of enlightenment, it is that the roots of the tree of enlightenment of bodhisattva great beings are made of gold, the trunk is made of beryl, the branches are made of the seven precious things, and the leaves are made of everything precious, while the fragrance of that tree and its exquisite radiance extensively permeate infinite world systems. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the excellence of the ornaments of the tree of enlightenment.
“If, among them, you ask what, for bodhisattva great beings, is the perfect excellence of the completion of all good qualities, it is that the buddhafields of bodhisattva great beings are pure and the beings they are to bring to maturation are pure. For bodhisattva great beings, this is the perfect excellence of the completion of all good qualities.
“If, among them, you ask how it is that bodhisattva great beings abiding on the tenth level are said to be just tathāgatas, it is on account of all the perfections that bodhisattva great beings have perfected, and the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four fearlessnesses, the four kinds of exact knowledge, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, the transcendental knowledge of an all-aspect omniscient one, the elimination of all the propensities for afflicted mental states that cause linking up, great compassion, and all the attributes of the buddhas that they have perfected. So it is, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings abiding on the tenth level are said to be just tathāgatas.
“Subhūti, if, among them, you ask what the ten levels of bodhisattva great beings are, Subhūti, here, when bodhisattva great beings who are expert in skillful means practice the perfection of generosity, practice the perfection of ethical discipline, practice the perfection of tolerance, practice the perfection of perseverance, practice the perfection of meditative concentration, and practice the perfection of wisdom; practice the emptiness of internal phenomena, practice the emptiness of external phenomena, practice the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, practice the emptiness of emptiness, practice the emptiness of great extent, practice the emptiness of ultimate reality, practice the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, practice the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, practice the emptiness of the unlimited, practice the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, practice the emptiness of nonexclusion, practice the emptiness of inherent nature, practice the emptiness of all phenomena, practice the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, practice the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, practice the emptiness of nonentities, practice the emptiness of essential nature, and practice the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; practice the applications of mindfulness, practice the correct exertions, practice the supports for miraculous ability, practice the faculties, practice the powers, practice the branches of enlightenment, and practice the noble eightfold path; practice the truths of the noble ones, practice the meditative concentrations, practice the immeasurable attitudes, practice the formless absorptions, practice the eight liberations, practice the nine serial steps of meditative absorption, practice the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, practice the extrasensory powers, practice the meditative stabilities, practice the dhāraṇī gateways, practice the ten powers of the tathāgatas, practice the four fearlessnesses, practice the four kinds of exact knowledge, practice great compassion, and practice the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, they transcend the level of bright insight, transcend the level of the spiritual family, transcend the eighth level, transcend the level of insight, transcend the level of attenuated refinement, transcend the level of no attachment, transcend the level of the realization of achievement, transcend the level of the śrāvakas, transcend the level of the pratyekabuddhas, and transcend the level of the bodhisattvas. Subhūti, bodhisattva great beings, having thus transcended those nine levels, stand on the level of a buddha. Subhūti, these are the ten levels of bodhisattva great beings. You should know it is in this way, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings enter perfectly into the Great Vehicle. 
“Subhūti, in regard to what you have asked—‘From where does this Great Vehicle go forth?’—by way of not apprehending anything it will attain emancipation from the three realms and rest in all-aspect omniscience. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because both that which is the Great Vehicle and that which is all-aspect omniscience are neither conjoined nor disjoined, do not have a form, cannot be pointed out, and are not impeded. That is to say, they thus have the single intrinsic defining characteristic of having no intrinsic defining characteristic. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because phenomena that have no intrinsic defining characteristics do not attain emancipation, will not attain emancipation, and have not attained emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the realm of phenomena to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the real nature to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the very limit of reality to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the realm of the inconceivable to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the realm of space to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the realm of the exhaustion of desire to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the realm of renunciation to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the realm of freedom from desire to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the realm of cessation to attain emancipation. 
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of physical forms to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of feelings to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of perceptions to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of formative predispositions to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of consciousness to attain emancipation. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of physical forms does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of feelings does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of perceptions does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of formative predispositions does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of consciousness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, it is because physical forms are empty of physical forms, because feelings are empty of feelings, because perceptions are empty of perceptions, because formative predispositions are empty of formative predispositions, and because consciousness is empty of consciousness.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of the eyes to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of the ears to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of the nose to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of the tongue to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of the body to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of the mental faculty to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of the eyes does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of the ears does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of the nose does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of the tongue does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of the body does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the emptiness of the mental faculty does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, it is because the eyes are empty of the eyes, because the ears are empty of the ears, because the nose is empty of the nose, because the tongue is empty of the tongue, because the body is empty of the body, and because the mental faculty is empty of the mental faculty.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of sights to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of sounds to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of odors to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of tastes to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of tangibles to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of mental phenomena to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of sights does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of sounds does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of odors does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of tastes does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of tangibles does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the emptiness of mental phenomena does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, it is because sights are empty of sights, because sounds are empty of sounds, because odors are empty of odors, because tastes are empty of tastes, because tangibles are empty of tangibles, and because mental phenomena are empty of mental phenomena.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of visual consciousness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of auditory consciousness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of olfactory consciousness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of gustatory consciousness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of tactile consciousness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of mental consciousness to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of visual consciousness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of auditory consciousness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of olfactory consciousness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of gustatory consciousness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of tactile consciousness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the emptiness of mental consciousness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because visual consciousness is empty of visual consciousness, because auditory consciousness is empty of auditory consciousness, because olfactory consciousness is empty of olfactory consciousness, because gustatory consciousness is empty of gustatory consciousness, because tactile consciousness is empty of tactile consciousness, and because mental consciousness is empty of mental consciousness.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of visually compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of aurally compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of nasally compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of lingually compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of corporeally compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of mentally compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of visually compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of aurally compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of nasally compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of lingually compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of corporeally compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the emptiness of mentally compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because visually compounded sensory contact is empty of visually compounded sensory contact, because aurally compounded sensory contact is empty of aurally compounded sensory contact, because nasally compounded sensory contact is empty of nasally compounded sensory contact, because lingually compounded sensory contact is empty of lingually compounded sensory contact, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is empty of corporeally compounded sensory contact, and because mentally compounded sensory contact is empty of mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the emptiness of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a dream to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want an illusion to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a mirage to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want an echo to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want an optical aberration to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a magical display of the tathāgatas to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because a dream does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. An illusion does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. A mirage does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. An echo does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. An optical aberration does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And a magical display of the tathāgatas does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because dreams are empty of dreams, because illusions are empty of illusions, because mirages are empty of mirages, because echoes are empty of echoes, because optical aberrations are empty of optical aberrations, and because magical displays of the tathāgatas are empty of magical displays of the tathāgatas.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the perfection of generosity to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the perfection of ethical discipline to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the perfection of tolerance to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the perfection of perseverance to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the perfection of meditative concentration to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the perfection of wisdom to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the perfection of generosity does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the perfection of ethical discipline does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the perfection of tolerance does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the perfection of perseverance does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the perfection of meditative concentration does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the essential nature of the perfection of wisdom does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the perfection of generosity is empty of the essential nature of the perfection of generosity, because the essential nature of the perfection of ethical discipline is empty of the essential nature of the perfection of ethical discipline, because the essential nature of the perfection of tolerance is empty of the essential nature of the perfection of tolerance, because the essential nature of the perfection of perseverance is empty of the essential nature of the perfection of perseverance, because the essential nature of the perfection of meditative concentration is empty of the essential nature of the perfection of meditative concentration, and because the essential nature of the perfection of wisdom is empty of the essential nature of the perfection of wisdom.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of internal phenomena to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of external phenomena to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of external and internal phenomena to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of emptiness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of great extent to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of ultimate reality to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of conditioned phenomena to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of the unlimited to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of nonexclusion to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of inherent nature to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of all phenomena to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of nonentities to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of essential nature to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of internal phenomena does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of external phenomena does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of emptiness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of great extent does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of ultimate reality does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of the unlimited does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of nonexclusion does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of inherent nature does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of all phenomena does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of nonentities does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of essential nature does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of internal phenomena, because the emptiness of external phenomena is empty of the emptiness of external phenomena, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, because the emptiness of emptiness is empty of the emptiness of emptiness, because the emptiness of great extent is empty of the emptiness of great extent, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is empty of the emptiness of ultimate reality, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is empty of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is empty of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, because the emptiness of the unlimited is empty of the emptiness of the unlimited, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is empty of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is empty of the emptiness of nonexclusion, because the emptiness of inherent nature is empty of the emptiness of inherent nature, because the emptiness of all phenomena is empty of the emptiness of all phenomena, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is empty of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is empty of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, because the emptiness of nonentities is empty of the emptiness of nonentities, because the emptiness of essential nature is empty of the emptiness of essential nature, and because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is empty of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the applications of mindfulness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the correct exertions to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the supports for miraculous ability to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the faculties to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the powers to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the branches of enlightenment to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the noble eightfold path to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the correct exertions does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the supports for miraculous ability does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the faculties does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the powers does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the branches of enlightenment does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the essential nature of the noble eightfold path does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness is empty of the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness, because the essential nature of the correct exertions is empty of the essential nature of the correct exertions, because the essential nature of the supports for miraculous ability is empty of the essential nature of the supports for miraculous ability, because the essential nature of the faculties is empty of the essential nature of the faculties, because the essential nature of the powers is empty of the essential nature of the powers, because the essential nature of the branches of enlightenment is empty of the essential nature of the branches of enlightenment, and because the essential nature of the noble eightfold path is empty of the essential nature of the noble eightfold path.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the truths of the noble ones to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the meditative concentrations to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the immeasurable attitudes to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the formless absorptions to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the liberations to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the serial steps of meditative absorption to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want emptiness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want signlessness to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want wishlessness to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the truths of the noble ones does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the meditative concentrations does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the immeasurable attitudes does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the formless absorptions does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the liberations does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the serial steps of meditative absorption does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of emptiness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of signlessness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the essential nature of wishlessness does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the truths of the noble ones is empty of the essential nature of the truths of the noble ones, because the essential nature of the meditative concentrations is empty of the essential nature of the meditative concentrations, because the essential nature of the immeasurable attitudes is empty of the essential nature of the immeasurable attitudes, because the essential nature of the formless absorptions is empty of the essential nature of the formless absorptions, because the essential nature of the liberations is empty of the essential nature of the liberations, because the essential nature of the serial steps of meditative absorption is empty of the essential nature of the serial steps of meditative absorption, because the essential nature of emptiness is empty of the essential nature of emptiness, because the essential nature of signlessness is empty of the essential nature of signlessness, and because the essential nature of wishlessness is empty of the essential nature of wishlessness.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the extrasensory powers to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the meditative stabilities to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the dhāraṇī gateways to attain emancipation. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the extrasensory powers does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the meditative stabilities does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the dhāraṇī gateways does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the extrasensory powers is empty of the essential nature of the extrasensory powers, because the essential nature of the meditative stabilities is empty of the essential nature of the meditative stabilities, and because the essential nature of the dhāraṇī gateways is empty of the essential nature of the dhāraṇī gateways.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the ten powers of the tathāgatas to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the four fearlessnesses to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the four kinds of exact knowledge to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the ten powers of the tathāgatas does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the fearlessnesses does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the four kinds of exact knowledge does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of a power of the tathāgatas is empty of the essential nature of a power of the tathāgatas, because the essential nature of a fearlessness is empty of the essential nature of a fearlessness; because the essential nature of a kind of exact knowledge is empty of the essential nature of a kind of exact knowledge; and because the essential nature of a distinct quality of the buddhas is empty of the essential nature of a distinct quality of the buddhas.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want an arhat whose contaminants have ceased to arise. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a pratyekabuddha to arise. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a bodhisattva to arise. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because an arhat whose contaminants have ceased does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. A pratyekabuddha does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. A bodhisattva does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of an arhat is empty of the essential nature of an arhat, because the essential nature of a pratyekabuddha is empty of the essential nature of a pratyekabuddha, because the essential nature of a bodhisattva is empty of the essential nature of a bodhisattva, and because the essential nature of a tathāgata is empty of the essential nature of a tathāgata.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the fruit of having entered the stream to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the fruit of once-returner to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the fruit of non-returner to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want arhatship to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want individual enlightenment to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want the knowledge of the aspects of the path to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want all-aspect omniscience to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the fruit of having entered the stream does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The fruit of once-returner does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The fruit of non-returner does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. Arhatship does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. Individual enlightenment does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The knowledge of the aspects of the path does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And all-aspect omniscience does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the fruit of having entered the stream is empty of the essential nature of the fruit of having entered the stream, because the essential nature of the fruit of once-returner is empty of the essential nature of the fruit of once-returner, because the essential nature of the fruit of non-returner is empty of the essential nature of the fruit of non-returner, because the essential nature of arhatship is empty of the essential nature of arhatship, because the essential nature of individual enlightenment is empty of the essential nature of individual enlightenment, because the essential nature of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is empty of the essential nature of the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and because the essential nature of all-aspect omniscience is empty of the essential nature of all-aspect omniscience.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a name to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a sign to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a symbol to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a conventional expression to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want a designation to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of a name does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of a sign does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of a symbol does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of a conventional expression does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The emptiness of a designation does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of a name is empty of the essential nature of the emptiness of a name, because the emptiness of a sign is empty of the essential nature of the emptiness of a sign, because the emptiness of a symbol is empty of the essential nature of the emptiness of a symbol, because the emptiness of a conventional expression is empty of the essential nature of the emptiness of a conventional expression, and because the emptiness of a designation is empty of the essential nature of the emptiness of a designation.
“Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want nonarising to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want nonceasing to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want nondefilement to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want nonpurification to attain emancipation. Subhūti, those who want phenomena without intrinsic defining characteristics to attain emancipation simply want nonconditioning to attain emancipation.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of nonarising does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of nonceasing does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of nondefilement does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. The essential nature of nonpurification does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience. And the essential nature of nonconditioning does not attain emancipation from the three realms and does not rest in all-aspect omniscience.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because nonarising is empty of the essential nature of nonarising, because nonceasing is empty of the essential nature of nonceasing, because nondefilement is empty of the essential nature of nondefilement, because nonpurification is empty of the essential nature of nonpurification, and because nonconditioning is empty of the essential nature of nonconditioning.
“Thus, Subhūti, because of these reasons you should know that the Great Vehicle does attain emancipation from the three realms and does rest in all-aspect omniscience––and that rest is immovable.
“Subhūti, you have asked, ‘Lord, where does this Great Vehicle come to rest?’ This Great Vehicle will not come to rest anywhere. If you ask why, it is because all phenomena are not at rest because a resting place cannot be apprehended. Thus, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle is at rest by way of not resting.
“Subhūti, just as the realm of phenomena is neither at rest nor not at rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle is neither at rest nor not at rest. Subhūti, just as the real nature is neither at rest nor not at rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle is neither at rest nor not at rest. Subhūti, just as the very limit of reality is neither at rest nor not at rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle is neither at rest nor not at rest. Subhūti, just as the realm of the inconceivable is neither at rest nor not at rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle is neither at rest nor not at rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the realm of phenomena there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the true nature there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the very limit of reality there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of the realm of the inconceivable there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the realm of phenomena is empty of the essential nature of the realm of phenomena, because the real nature is empty of the essential nature of the real nature, because the very limit of reality is empty of the essential nature of the very limit of reality, and because the realm of the inconceivable is empty of the essential nature of the realm of the inconceivable.
“Subhūti, just as the realm of space neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the realm of the exhaustion of desire neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the realm of the renunciation neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the realm of freedom from desire neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the realm of cessation neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the realm of space there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the realm of the exhaustion of desire there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the realm of renunciation there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the realm of freedom from desire there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of the realm of cessation there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the realm of space is empty of the essential nature of the realm of space, because the realm of the exhaustion of desire is empty of the essential nature of the realm of the exhaustion of desire, because the realm of renunciation is empty of the essential nature of the realm of renunciation, because the realm of freedom from desire is empty of the essential nature of the realm of freedom from desire, and because the realm of cessation is empty of the essential nature of the realm of cessation. 
“Subhūti, just as the emptiness of physical forms neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of feelings neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of perceptions neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of formative predispositions neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of consciousness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of physical forms there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the realm of feelings there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the realm of perception there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of formative predispositions there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of consciousness there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because physical forms are empty of physical forms, because feelings are empty of feelings, because perceptions are empty of perceptions, because formative predispositions are empty of formative predispositions, and because consciousness is empty of consciousness.
“Subhūti, just as the emptiness of the eyes neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of the ears neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of the nose neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of the tongue neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of the body neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the emptiness of the mental faculty neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the eyes there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the ears there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the nose there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the tongue there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the body there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of the mental faculty there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the eyes are empty of the eyes, because the ears are empty of the ears, because the nose is empty of the nose, because the tongue is empty of the tongue, because the body is empty of the body, and because the mental faculty is empty of the mental faculty.
“Subhūti, just as the emptiness of sights neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of sounds neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of odors neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of tastes neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of tangibles neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the emptiness of mental phenomena neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of sights there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of sounds there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of odors there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of tastes there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of tangibles there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of mental phenomena there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because sights are empty of sights, because sounds are empty of sounds, because odors are empty of odors, because tastes are empty of tastes, because tangibles are empty of tangibles, and because mental phenomena are empty of mental phenomena.
“Subhūti, just as the emptiness of visual consciousness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of auditory consciousness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of olfactory consciousness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of gustatory consciousness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of tactile consciousness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the emptiness of mental consciousness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of visual consciousness there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of auditory consciousness there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of olfactory consciousness there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of gustatory consciousness there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of tactile consciousness there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of mental consciousness there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because visual consciousness is empty of visual consciousness, because auditory consciousness is empty of auditory consciousness, because olfactory consciousness is empty of olfactory consciousness, because gustatory consciousness is empty of gustatory consciousness, because tactile consciousness is empty of tactile consciousness, and because mental consciousness is empty of mental consciousness.
“Subhūti, just as the emptiness of visually compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of aurally compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of nasally compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of lingually compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of corporeally compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the emptiness of mentally compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of visually compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of aurally compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of nasally compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of lingually compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of corporeally compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of mentally compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because visually compounded sensory contact is empty of visually compounded sensory contact, because aurally compounded sensory contact is empty of aurally compounded sensory contact, because nasally compounded sensory contact is empty of nasally compounded sensory contact, because lingually compounded sensory contact is empty of lingually compounded sensory contact, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is empty of corporeally compounded sensory contact, and because mentally compounded sensory contact is empty of mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Subhūti, just as the emptiness of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the emptiness of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Subhūti, just as a dream neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as an illusion neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as a mirage neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as an echo neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as an optical aberration neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as a reflection neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as a magical display of the tathāgatas neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of a dream there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of an illusion there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of a mirage there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of an echo there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of an optical aberration there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of a reflection there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of a magical display of the tathāgatas there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because dreams are empty of dreams, because illusions are empty of illusions, because mirages are empty of mirages, because echoes are empty of echoes, because optical aberrations are empty of optical aberrations, because reflections are empty of reflections, and because magical displays of the tathāgatas are empty of magical displays of the tathāgatas.
“Subhūti, just as the perfection of generosity neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the perfection of ethical discipline neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the perfection of tolerance neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the perfection of perseverance neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the perfection of meditative concentration neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the perfection of wisdom neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the perfection of generosity there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the perfection of ethical discipline there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the perfection of tolerance there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the perfection of perseverance there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the perfection of meditative concentration there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of the perfection of wisdom there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the perfection of generosity is empty of the perfection of generosity, because the perfection of ethical discipline is empty of the perfection of ethical discipline, because the perfection of tolerance is empty of the perfection of tolerance, because the perfection of perseverance is empty of the perfection of perseverance, because the perfection of meditative concentration is empty of the perfection of meditative concentration, and because the perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom.
“Subhūti, just as the emptiness of internal phenomena neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of external phenomena neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of external and internal phenomena neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of emptiness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of great extent neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of ultimate reality neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of conditioned phenomena neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of the unlimited neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of nonexclusion neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of inherent nature neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of all phenomena neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of nonentities neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness of essential nature neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the emptiness of internal phenomena there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of external phenomena there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of emptiness there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of great extent there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of ultimate reality there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of the unlimited there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of nonexclusion there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of inherent nature there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of all phenomena there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of nonentities there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness of essential nature there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of internal phenomena, because the emptiness of external phenomena is empty of the emptiness of external phenomena, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, because the emptiness of emptiness is empty of the emptiness of emptiness, because the emptiness of great extent is empty of the emptiness of great extent, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is empty of the emptiness of ultimate reality, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is empty of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is empty of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, because the emptiness of the unlimited is empty of the emptiness of the unlimited, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is empty of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is empty of the emptiness of nonexclusion, because the emptiness of inherent nature is empty of the emptiness of inherent nature, because the emptiness of all phenomena is empty of the emptiness of all phenomena, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is empty of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is empty of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, because the emptiness of nonentities is empty of the emptiness of nonentities, because the emptiness of essential nature is empty of the emptiness of essential nature, and because the emptiness of the essential nature of nonentities is empty of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities.
“Subhūti, just as the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the essential nature of the correct exertions neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the essential nature of the supports for miraculous ability neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the essential nature of the faculties neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the essential nature of the powers neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the essential nature of the branches of enlightenment neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the essential nature of the noble eightfold path neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the correct exertions there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the supports for miraculous ability there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the faculties there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the powers there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the branches of enlightenment there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of the noble eightfold path there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness, because the correct exertions are empty of the correct exertions, because the supports for miraculous ability are empty of the supports for miraculous ability, because the faculties are empty of the faculties, because the powers are empty of the powers; because the branches of enlightenment are empty of the branches of enlightenment, and because the noble eightfold path is empty of the noble eightfold path.
“Subhūti, just as the truths of the noble ones neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the meditative concentrations neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the immeasurable attitudes neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the formless absorptions neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the liberations neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the serial steps of meditative absorption neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the emptiness, the signlessness, and the wishlessness gateways to liberation neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the extrasensory powers neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the meditative stabilities neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the dhāraṇī gateways neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the truths of the noble ones there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the meditative concentrations there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the immeasurable attitudes there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the formless absorptions there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the eight liberations there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the nine serial steps of meditative absorption there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the emptiness, the signlessness, and the wishlessness gateways to liberation there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the extrasensory powers there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the meditative stabilities there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of the dhāraṇī gateways there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the truths of the noble ones are empty of the truths of the noble ones, because the meditative concentrations are empty of the meditative concentrations, because the immeasurable attitudes are empty of the immeasurable attitudes, because the formless absorptions are empty of the formless absorptions, because the liberations are empty of the liberations, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are empty of the serial steps of meditative absorption, because emptiness is empty of emptiness, because signlessness is empty of signlessness, because wishlessness is empty of wishlessness, because the extrasensory powers are empty of the extrasensory powers, because the meditative stabilities are empty of the meditative stabilities, and because the dhāraṇī gateways are empty of the dhāraṇī gateways.
“Subhūti, just as the ten powers of the tathāgatas neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the four fearlessnesses neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the four kinds of exact knowledge neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as great compassion neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas neither rest nor do not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the ten powers of the tathāgatas there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the fearlessnesses there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the immeasurable attitudes there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the kinds of exact knowledge there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of great compassion there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the ten powers of the tathāgatas are empty of the ten powers of the tathāgatas, because the four fearlessnesses are empty of the four fearlessnesses, because the four kinds of exact knowledge are empty of the four kinds of exact knowledge, because great compassion is empty of great compassion, and because the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are empty of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Subhūti, just as an arhat whose contaminants have ceased neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as a pratyekabuddha neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of an arhat there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of a pratyekabuddha there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of an arhat is empty of the essential nature of an arhat, and because the essential nature of a pratyekabuddha is empty of the essential nature of a pratyekabuddha.
“Subhūti, just as a bodhisattva neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of a bodhisattva there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of a tathāgata there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of a bodhisattva is empty of the essential nature of a bodhisattva, and because the essential nature of a tathāgata is empty of the essential nature of a tathāgata.
“Subhūti, just as the fruit of having entered the stream neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the fruit of once-returner neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as the fruit of non-returner neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as arhatship neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as individual enlightenment neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the fruit of having entered the stream there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the fruit of once-returner there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of the fruit of non-returner there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of arhatship there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of individual enlightenment there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the fruit of having entered the stream is empty of the essential nature of the fruit of having entered the stream, because the essential nature of the fruit of once-returner is empty of the essential nature of the fruit of once-returner, because the essential nature of the fruit of non-returner is empty of the essential nature of the fruit of non-returner, because the essential nature of arhatship is empty of the essential nature of arhatship, and because the essential nature of individual enlightenment is empty of the essential nature of individual enlightenment.
“Subhūti, just as the knowledge of the aspects of the path neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as all-aspect omniscience neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of the knowledge of the aspects of the path there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of all-aspect omniscience there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is empty of the essential nature of the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and because the essential nature of all-aspect omniscience is empty of the essential nature of all-aspect omniscience.
“Subhūti, just as a name neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as a sign neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as a symbol neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as a conventional expression neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as a designation neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of a name there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of a sign there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of a symbol there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of a conventional expression there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of a designation there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, because the essential nature of a sign is empty of the essential nature of a sign, because the essential nature of a symbol is empty of the essential nature of a symbol, because the essential nature of a conventional expression is empty of the essential nature of a conventional expression, and because the essential nature of a designation is empty of the essential nature of a designation.
“Subhūti, just as nonarising neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as nonceasing neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. Subhūti, just as nondefilement neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. And, Subhūti, just as nonpurification neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because in the essential nature of nonarising there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of nonceasing there is neither rest nor no rest, in the essential nature of nondefilement there is neither rest nor no rest, and in the essential nature of nonpurification there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of nonarising is empty of the essential nature of nonarising, because the essential nature of nonceasing is empty of the essential nature of nonceasing, because the essential nature of nondefilement is empty of the essential nature of nondefilement, and because the essential nature of nonpurification is empty of the essential nature of nonpurification.
“Subhūti, just as nonconditioning neither rests nor does not rest, similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle does not rest, nor does it not rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, in the essential nature of nonconditioning there is neither rest nor no rest.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the essential nature of nonconditioning is empty of the essential nature of nonconditioning. 
“Thus, Subhūti, because of these reasons, since this Great Vehicle rests by way of not resting and since it is immovable, it will not come to rest anywhere.
“Subhūti, you have asked, ‘Who will go forth in this vehicle?’ No one will attain emancipation by means of this vehicle. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because all those phenomena––that which is this vehicle, those who would attain emancipation, that by which they would attain emancipation, and that from which they would attain emancipation––do not exist and are not apprehended. Since all phenomena thus do not exist and are not apprehended, what phenomenon would attain emancipation by means of what phenomenon?
“If you ask why, Subhūti, since they are beyond limits because the self is utterly pure, a being is utterly pure, a life form is utterly pure, a living being is utterly pure, a life is utterly pure, an individual is utterly pure, a person is utterly pure, one born of Manu is utterly pure, a child of Manu is utterly pure, an agent is utterly pure, an experiencer is utterly pure, a knower is utterly pure, and a viewer is utterly pure, therefore the self cannot be apprehended, a being cannot be apprehended, a life form cannot be apprehended, a living being cannot be apprehended, a life cannot be apprehended, an individual cannot be apprehended, a person cannot be apprehended, one born of Manu cannot be apprehended, a child of Manu cannot be apprehended, an agent cannot be apprehended, an experiencer cannot be apprehended, a knower cannot be apprehended, and a viewer cannot be apprehended. 
“The realm of phenomena cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the real nature cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the very limit of reality cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and the realm of the inconceivable cannot be apprehended because of utter purity. The aggregates cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the sensory elements cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the sense fields cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and dependent origination cannot be apprehended because of utter purity. The perfection of generosity cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the perfection of ethical discipline cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the perfection of tolerance cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the perfection of perseverance cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the perfection of meditative concentration cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended because of utter purity.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of external phenomena cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of emptiness cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of great extent cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of ultimate reality cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of the unlimited cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of nonexclusion cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of inherent nature cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of all phenomena cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of nonentities cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness of essential nature cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities cannot be apprehended because of utter purity.
“The applications of mindfulness cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the correct exertions cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the supports for miraculous ability cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the faculties cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the powers cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the branches of enlightenment cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and the noble eightfold path cannot be apprehended because of utter purity.
“The truths of the noble ones cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the meditative concentrations cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the immeasurable attitudes cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the formless absorptions cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the liberations cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the serial steps of meditative absorption cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the extrasensory powers cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the meditative stabilities cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the dhāraṇī gateways cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the powers of the tathāgatas cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the fearlessnesses cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the kinds of exact knowledge cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, great compassion cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas cannot be apprehended because of utter purity.
“Those who have entered the stream cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, once-returners cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, non-returners cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, arhats cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, pratyekabuddhas cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas cannot be apprehended because of utter purity. The fruit of having entered the stream cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the fruit of once-returner cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the fruit of non-returner cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, arhatship cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, individual enlightenment cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the knowledge of the aspects of the path cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and all-aspect omniscience cannot be apprehended because of utter purity. Nonarising cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, nonceasing cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, nondefilement cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, nonpurification cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and nonconditioning cannot be apprehended because of utter purity. The limits of past time cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the limits of future time cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, the present cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, coming cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, going cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, abiding cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, death cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, birth cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, decrease cannot be apprehended because of utter purity, and increase cannot be apprehended because of utter purity.
“If you ask, on account of not apprehending, what are all not apprehended, the realm of phenomena is not apprehended because of not apprehending the realm of phenomena. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the realm of phenomena that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. 
“The real nature is not apprehended because of not apprehending the real nature. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the real nature that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The very limit of reality is not apprehended because of not apprehending the very limit of reality. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the very limit of reality that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The expanse of the inconceivable is not apprehended because of not apprehending the expanse of the inconceivable. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the expanse of the inconceivable that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The aggregates, the sensory elements, and the sense fields are not apprehended because of not apprehending the aggregates, the sensory elements, and the sense fields. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the aggregates, the sensory elements, and the sense fields that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. Dependent origination is not apprehended because of not apprehending dependent origination. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because dependent origination that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“The perfection of generosity is not apprehended because of not apprehending the perfection of generosity. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the perfection of generosity that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The perfection of ethical discipline is not apprehended because of not apprehending the perfection of ethical discipline. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the perfection of ethical discipline that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The perfection of tolerance is not apprehended because of not apprehending the perfection of tolerance. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the perfection of tolerance that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The perfection of perseverance is not apprehended because of not apprehending the perfection of perseverance. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the perfection of perseverance that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The perfection of meditative concentration is not apprehended because of not apprehending the perfection of meditative concentration. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the perfection of meditative concentration that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The perfection of wisdom is not apprehended because of not apprehending the perfection of wisdom. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the perfection of wisdom that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of internal phenomena. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of internal phenomena that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of external phenomena is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of external phenomena. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of external phenomena that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of external and internal phenomena. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of emptiness is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of emptiness. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of emptiness that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of great extent is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of great extent. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of great extent that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of ultimate reality is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of ultimate reality. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of ultimate reality that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of conditioned phenomena. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of the unlimited is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of the unlimited. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of the unlimited that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of nonexclusion is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of nonexclusion. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of nonexclusion that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of inherent nature is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of inherent nature. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of inherent nature that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of all phenomena is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of all phenomena. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of all phenomena that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of nonentities is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of nonentities. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of nonentities that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of essential nature is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of essential nature. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of essential nature that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“The applications of mindfulness are not apprehended because of not apprehending the applications of mindfulness. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the applications of mindfulness that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The correct exertions are not apprehended because of not apprehending the correct exertions. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the correct exertions that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The supports for miraculous ability are not apprehended because of not apprehending the supports for miraculous ability. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the supports for miraculous ability that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The faculties are not apprehended because of not apprehending the faculties. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the faculties that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. the powers are not apprehended because of not apprehending the powers. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the powers that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The branches of enlightenment are not apprehended because of not apprehending the branches of enlightenment. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the branches of enlightenment that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The noble eightfold path is not apprehended because of not apprehending the noble eightfold path. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the noble eightfold path that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“The truths of the noble ones are not apprehended because of not apprehending the truths of the noble ones. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the truths of the noble ones that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The meditative concentrations are not apprehended because of not apprehending the meditative concentrations. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the meditative concentrations that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The immeasurable attitudes are not apprehended because of not apprehending the immeasurable attitudes. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the immeasurable attitudes that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The formless absorptions are not apprehended because of not apprehending the formless absorptions. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the formless absorptions that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The liberations are not apprehended because of not apprehending the liberations. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the liberations that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The serial steps of meditative absorption are not apprehended because of not apprehending the serial steps of meditative absorption. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the serial steps of meditative absorption that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are not apprehended because of not apprehending the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The extrasensory powers are not apprehended because of not apprehending the extrasensory powers. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the extrasensory powers that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The meditative stabilities are not apprehended because of not apprehending the meditative stabilities. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the meditative stabilities that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The dhāraṇī gateways are not apprehended because of not apprehending the dhāraṇī gateways. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the dhāraṇī gateways that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended.
“The powers of the tathāgatas are not apprehended because of not apprehending the powers of the tathāgatas. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the powers of the tathāgatas that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The fearlessnesses are not apprehended because of not apprehending the fearlessnesses. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the fearlessnesses that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The kinds of exact knowledge are not apprehended because of not apprehending the kinds of exact knowledge. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the kinds of exact knowledge that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. Great loving kindness is not apprehended because of not apprehending great loving kindness. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because great loving kindness that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Great compassion is not apprehended because of not apprehending great compassion. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because great compassion that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are not apprehended because of not apprehending the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. 
“Those who have entered the stream are not apprehended because of not apprehending those who have entered the stream. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because those who have entered the stream who are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. Once-returners are not apprehended because of not apprehending once-returners. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because once-returners who are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. Non-returners are not apprehended because of not apprehending non-returners. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because non-returners who are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. Arhats are not apprehended because of not apprehending arhats. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because arhats who are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. Pratyekabuddhas are not apprehended because of not apprehending pratyekabuddhas. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because pratyekabuddhas who are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. Bodhisattvas are not apprehended because of not apprehending bodhisattvas. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because bodhisattvas who are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. Tathāgatas are not apprehended because of not apprehending tathāgatas. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because tathāgatas who are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended.
“The fruit of having entered the stream is not apprehended because of not apprehending the fruit of having entered the stream. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the fruit of having entered the stream that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The fruit of once-returner is not apprehended because of not apprehending the fruit of once-returner. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the fruit of once-returner that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The fruit of non-returner is not apprehended because of not apprehending the fruit of non-returner. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the fruit of non-returner that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Arhatship is not apprehended because of not apprehending arhatship. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because arhatship that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Individual enlightenment is not apprehended because of not apprehending individual enlightenment. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because individual enlightenment that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The knowledge of the aspects of the path is not apprehended because of not apprehending the knowledge of the aspects of the path. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the knowledge of the aspects of the path that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. All-aspect omniscience is not apprehended because of not apprehending all-aspect omniscience. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because all-aspect omniscience that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“Nonarising is not apprehended because of not apprehending nonarising. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because nonarising that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Nonceasing is not apprehended because of not apprehending nonceasing. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because nonceasing that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Nondefilement is not apprehended because of not apprehending nondefilement. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because nondefilement that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Nonpurification is not apprehended because of not apprehending nonpurification. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because nonpurification that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Nonconditioning is not apprehended because of not apprehending nonconditioning. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because nonconditioning that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“The limits of past time are not apprehended because of not apprehending the limits of past time. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the limits of past time that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The limits of future time are not apprehended because of not apprehending the limits of future time. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the limits of future time that are not apprehended are neither apprehended, nor are they not apprehended. The present is not apprehended because of not apprehending the present. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the present that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“Coming is not apprehended because of not apprehending coming. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because coming that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Going is not apprehended because of not apprehending going. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because going that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Abiding is not apprehended because of not apprehending abiding. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because abiding that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Death is not apprehended because of not apprehending death. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because death that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Birth is not apprehended because of not apprehending birth. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because birth that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Decrease is not apprehended because of not apprehending decrease. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because decrease that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. Increase is not apprehended because of not apprehending increase. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because increase that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“The first level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the first level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the first level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The second level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the second level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the second level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The third level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the third level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the third level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The fourth level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the fourth level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the fourth level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The fifth level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the fifth level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the fifth level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The sixth level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the sixth level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the sixth level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The seventh level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the seventh level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the seventh level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The eighth level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the eighth level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the eighth level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The ninth level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the ninth level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the ninth level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended. The tenth level is not apprehended because of not apprehending the tenth level. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the tenth level that is not apprehended is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“If, among them, you ask what the first level is, what the second level is, what the third level is, what the fourth level is, what the fifth level is, what the sixth level is, what the seventh level is, what the eighth level is, what the ninth level is, and what the tenth level is, they are, respectively, the level of bright insight, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, the level of the achievement of realization, the level of the pratyekabuddhas, the level of the bodhisattvas, and the level of the buddhas.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the first level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the first level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the first level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the second level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the second level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the second level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the third level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the third level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the third level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the fourth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the fourth level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the fourth level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the fifth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the fifth level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the fifth level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the sixth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the sixth level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the sixth level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the seventh level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the seventh level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the seventh level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the eighth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the eighth level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the eighth level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the ninth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the ninth level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the ninth level is not apprehended.
“Because of the emptiness of internal phenomena the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external phenomena the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of emptiness the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of great extent the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of ultimate reality the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of the unlimited the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonexclusion the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of inherent nature the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of all phenomena the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of nonentities the tenth level is not apprehended; because of the emptiness of essential nature the tenth level is not apprehended; and because of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities the tenth level is not apprehended.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the first level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; the second level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; the third level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; the fourth level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; the fifth level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; the sixth level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; the seventh level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; the eighth level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; the ninth level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended; and the tenth level that cannot be apprehended because of utter purity is neither apprehended, nor is it not apprehended.
“Owing to the emptiness of internal phenomena, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of external phenomena, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of emptiness, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of great extent, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of ultimate reality, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of the unlimited, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of nonexclusion, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of inherent nature, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of all phenomena, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of nonentities, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of essential nature, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, because of utter purity the maturation of beings is not apprehended.
“Owing to the emptiness of internal phenomena, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of external phenomena, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of emptiness, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of great extent, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of ultimate reality, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of the unlimited, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of nonexclusion, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of inherent nature, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of all phenomena, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of nonentities, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of essential nature, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, because of utter purity the refinement of a buddhafield is not apprehended.
“Owing to the emptiness of internal phenomena, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of external phenomena, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of emptiness, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of great extent, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of ultimate reality, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of the unlimited, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of nonexclusion, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of inherent nature, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of all phenomena, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of nonentities, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of essential nature, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended. Owing to the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, because of utter purity the five eyes are not apprehended.
“So it is, Subhūti, that bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom will attain emancipation in all-aspect omniscience in the Great Vehicle through not apprehending any phenomena. 
This completes the tenth chapter from The Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand Lines. 
Chapter 11
Then the venerable Subhūti said to the Blessed One, “Blessed Lord, the Great Vehicle is called a ‘Great Vehicle.’ It outshines the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attains emancipation; that is why it is called a Great Vehicle. 
“Blessed Lord, this Great Vehicle is the same as space. Just as space gives space to countless, immeasurable beings, similarly this Great Vehicle also gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. For this reason, Blessed Lord, this is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. For this Great Vehicle, going and coming are not discerned, nor standing still. The limit of the past, the limit of the future, and a middle are also not discerned.
“Blessed Lord, to illustrate, just as for space neither going or coming is discerned, and standing still too is not discerned, similarly, for this Great Vehicle, going is not apprehended, an attainment of emancipation is not apprehended, and standing still is not apprehended. 
“Blessed Lord, to illustrate, just as, because of the sameness of the three times, for space the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and a middle is not apprehended, similarly for this Great Vehicle, also, because of the sameness of the three times, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and a middle is not apprehended. Blessed Lord, it is a vehicle that is the sameness of the three times; that is why it is called a Great Vehicle. 
The Blessed One said, “That is so, Subhūti, that is so! These six perfections—namely, the perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of meditative concentration, and the perfection of wisdom—are the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings. This is called the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is all the dhāraṇī gateways and all these gateways of meditative stability, namely, the meditative stability heroic valor, the meditative stability precious seal, the meditative stability lion’s play, the meditative stability beautiful moon, the meditative stability crest of the moon’s victory banner, the meditative stability surpassing all phenomena, the meditative stability seal of all phenomena, the meditative stability surveying the crown pinnacle, the meditative stability certainty in the realm of phenomena, the meditative stability crest of certainty’s victory banner, the meditative stability vajra, the meditative stability seal of entry into all phenomena, the meditative stability well established as the king of meditative stabilities, the meditative stability excellently well established, the meditative stability well-founded king of meditative stabilities, the meditative stability diffusion of light rays, the meditative stability without mistakes, the meditative stability because of the diffusion of light rays not making mistakes, the meditative stability power of effort, the meditative stability array of power, the meditative stability exalted, the meditative stability engaging with certainty in lexical explanations, the meditative stability entry into designations, the meditative stability observation of spatial directions, the meditative stability sealed with the seal, the meditative stability unimpaired, the meditative stability oceanic seal gathering all phenomena, the meditative stability seal of the king, the meditative stability permeation of space, the meditative stability vajra maṇḍala, the meditative stability purified of the three spheres, the meditative stability shoulder ornament of the victory banner’s crest, the meditative stability Indra’s crest, the meditative stability pursuit of the stream, the meditative stability yawning lion, the meditative stability stretching lion, the meditative stability stretching-out lion, the meditative stability beyond sequence, the meditative stability without attachment or impediment, the meditative stability repudiation of afflicted mental states, the meditative stability illumination, the meditative stability unseeking, the meditative stability no fixed abode, the meditative stability free from mentation, the meditative stability taming the four māras, the meditative stability stainless lamplight, the meditative stability boundless light, the meditative stability illuminator
, the meditative stability total illumination, the meditative stability pure supremacy, the meditative stability stainless light, the meditative stability bringer of joy, the meditative stability lightning lamp, the meditative stability inexhaustible, the meditative stability unvanquished, the meditative stability majestic, the meditative stability free from extinction, the meditative stability unmoving, the meditative stability calmed, the meditative stability imperishable, the meditative stability lamp of the sun, the meditative stability immaculate moon, the meditative stability clear-eyed, the meditative stability lamp of wisdom, the meditative stability clear appearance, the meditative stability moon lamp, the meditative stability illuminating, the meditative stability does what needs to be done, the meditative stability glory of transcendental knowledge, the meditative stability vajra-like, the meditative stability stability of mind, the meditative stability total illumination, the meditative stability well situated, the meditative stability jewel cusp, the meditative stability seal of the supreme phenomenon, the meditative stability sameness of all phenomena, the meditative stability renunciation of delight, the meditative stability elevated by phenomena, the meditative stability expanded on account of being elevated by phenomena, the meditative stability jewel state, the meditative stability forsaking fights, the meditative stability dispersal, the meditative stability distinguishing the terms associated with all phenomena, the meditative stability determination, the meditative stability stainless performance, the meditative stability arranging the sameness of letters, the meditative stability devoid of letters, the meditative stability cutting off the objective support, the meditative stability unmodified, the meditative stability aspectless, the meditative stability entering into names and signs, the meditative stability free from activity, the meditative stability entering into the ascertainment of names, the meditative stability a practitioner without a dwelling, the meditative stability devoid of darkness, the meditative stability endowed with practice, the meditative stability unwavering, the meditative stability 
transcendence of the range, the meditative stability accumulation of all attributes, the meditative stability abiding without mentation, the meditative stability abiding with certainty, the meditative stability blossoming and vibrance of the flowers of virtue, the meditative stability endowed with the branches of enlightenment, the meditative stability boundless eloquence, the meditative stability boundless lamplight, the meditative stability equal to the unequaled, the meditative stability transcending all phenomena, the meditative stability delineator, the meditative stability dispelling doubt, the meditative stability without settled focus, the meditative stability single array, the meditative stability manifest attainment of aspects, the meditative stability single aspect, the meditative stability nonexclusion of the aspect, the meditative stability supreme performance, the meditative stability comprehension of all bases of existence through realization, the meditative stability entrance to symbols and sounds, the meditative stability jewel heart, the meditative stability unattached to any phenomena, the meditative stability array of flashes of lightning, the meditative stability forsaking, the meditative stability lamp of doctrine, the meditative stability lamp of transcendental knowledge, the meditative stability manifest attainment of the miraculous ability to not return, the meditative stability devoid of vocalic syllables, the meditative stability burning lamp, the meditative stability purification of defining characteristics, the meditative stability nondistinguished, the meditative stability endowed with a distinct forbearance, the meditative stability endowed with all finest aspects, the meditative stability endowed with dhāraṇīs, the meditative stability absence of joy with respect to all happiness and suffering, the meditative stability inexhaustible cornucopia, the meditative stability dhāraṇī intelligence, the meditative stability perfect elimination of right and wrong, the meditative stability perfect calming of all contradictions and refutations, the meditative stability no harmony or disharmony, the meditative stability taintless light, the meditative stability endowed with the essence, the meditative stability taintless light of the full moon, the meditative stability lightning light, the meditative stability great ornament, the meditative stability illuminator in all respects, the meditative stability protector of all worlds, the meditative stability sameness of meditative stability, the meditative stability with a dustless and dust-free principle
, the meditative stability convergence in nonaffliction, the meditative stability convergence of all afflicted mental states in nonaffliction, the meditative stability intent on a dwelling that has not been apprehended, the meditative stability abiding in the real nature without mentation, the meditative stability self-originated from the vessel, the meditative stability incinerating all afflicted mental states, the meditative stability lamp of great transcendental knowledge, the meditative stability origin of the ten powers, the meditative stability opener of the gateways, the meditative stability dispelling the defects of corporeality, the meditative stability obliterating defects of speech, transforming them as if into space, the meditative stability dispelling the defects of the mind, the meditative stability thorough investigation, the meditative stability space-like, and the meditative stability space-like and without attachment, hence free and without blemish. This is called the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Moreover, Subhūti, the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this, namely, the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the emptiness of nonentities, the emptiness of essential nature, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path; the four truths of the noble ones, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable attitudes, the four formless absorptions, the eight liberations, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, the extrasensory powers, the meditative stabilities, and the dhāraṇī gateways; and the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four fearlessnesses, the four kinds of exact knowledge, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. This is the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings.
“Subhūti, you said this Great Vehicle ‘outshines the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attains emancipation.’ If you ask what this world with its gods, humans, and asuras is, it is this, namely, the realm of desire, the realm of form, and the realm of formlessness. 
“Subhūti, if the realm of desire were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because this realm of desire is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the realm of form were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because this realm of form is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the realm of formlessness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because this realm of formlessness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if physical forms were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because physical forms are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if feelings were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because feelings are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if perceptions were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because perceptions are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if formative predispositions were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because formative predispositions are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if consciousness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because consciousness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the eyes were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the eyes are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the ears were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the ears are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the nose were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the nose is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the tongue were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the tongue is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the body were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the body is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the mental faculty were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the mental faculty is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. 
“Subhūti, if sights were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because sights are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if sounds were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because sounds are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if odors were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because odors are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if tastes were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because tastes are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if tangibles were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because tangibles are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if mental phenomena were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because mental phenomena are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if visual consciousness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because visual consciousness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if auditory consciousness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because auditory consciousness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if olfactory consciousness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because olfactory consciousness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if gustatory consciousness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because gustatory consciousness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if tactile consciousness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because tactile consciousness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if mental consciousness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because mental consciousness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if visually compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because visually compounded sensory contact is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if aurally compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because aurally compounded sensory contact is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if nasally compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because nasally compounded sensory contact is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if lingually compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because lingually compounded sensory contact is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if corporeally compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if mentally compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because mentally compounded sensory contact is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the earth element were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the earth element is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the water element were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the water element is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the fire element were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the fire element is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the wind element were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the wind element is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the consciousness element were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the consciousness element is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if ignorance were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because ignorance is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if formative predispositions were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because formative predispositions are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if consciousness were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because consciousness is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if name and form were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because name and form are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the six sense fields were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the six sense fields are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if sensory contact were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because sensory contact is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if sensation were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because sensation is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if craving were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because craving is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if grasping were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because grasping is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the rebirth process were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the rebirth process is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if birth were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and an entity endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because birth is constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, is impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and a nonentity endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if aging and death were the real, the unmistaken real, the one and only real—that is to say, incontrovertible, true, and perfect, as things are, permanent, stable, eternal, and entities endowed with the attribute of not changing—then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because aging and death are constructed, fashioned, and fabricated—that is to say, are impermanent, unstable, not eternal, and nonentities endowed with the attribute of changing—this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. 
“Subhūti, if the perfection of generosity were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the perfection of generosity is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the perfection of ethical discipline were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the perfection of ethical discipline is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the perfection of tolerance were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the perfection of tolerance is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the perfection of perseverance were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the perfection of perseverance is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the perfection of meditative concentration were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the perfection of meditative concentration is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the perfection of wisdom were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the perfection of wisdom is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. 
“Subhūti, if the emptiness of internal phenomena were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of external phenomena were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of external phenomena is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of external and internal phenomena were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of emptiness were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of emptiness is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of great extent were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of great extent is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of ultimate reality were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of conditioned phenomena were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of the unlimited were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of the unlimited is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of nonexclusion were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of inherent nature were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of inherent nature is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of all phenomena were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of all phenomena is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of nonentities were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of nonentities is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of essential nature were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of essential nature is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is a nonentity, not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the applications of mindfulness were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the applications of mindfulness are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the correct exertions were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the correct exertions are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the supports for miraculous ability were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the supports for miraculous ability are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the faculties were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the faculties are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the powers were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the powers are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the branches of enlightenment were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the branches of enlightenment are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the noble eightfold path were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the noble eightfold path is a nonentity and not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the truths of the noble ones were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the truths of the noble ones are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the meditative concentrations were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the meditative concentrations are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the immeasurable attitudes were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the immeasurable attitudes are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the formless absorptions were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the formless absorptions are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the liberations were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the liberations are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the serial steps of meditative absorption were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the extrasensory powers were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the extrasensory powers are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the meditative stabilities were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the meditative stabilities are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the dhāraṇī gateways were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the dhāraṇī gateways are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. 
“Subhūti, if the powers of the tathāgatas were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the powers of the tathāgatas are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the fearlessnesses were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the fearlessnesses are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the kinds of exact knowledge were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the kinds of exact knowledge are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if great compassion were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because great compassion is a nonentity and not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the attributes of those at the level of the spiritual family were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of those at the level of the spiritual family are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the attributes of those at the eighth level were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of those at the eighth level are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the attributes of those who have entered the stream were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of those who have entered the stream are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the attributes of once-returners were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of once-returners are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the attributes of non-returners were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of non-returners are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the attributes of arhats were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of arhats are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the attributes of pratyekabuddhas were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of pratyekabuddhas are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the attributes of bodhisattvas were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of bodhisattvas are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the attributes of buddhas were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the attributes of buddhas are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. 
“Subhūti, if those on the level of the spiritual family were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because those on the level of the spiritual family are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if those at the eighth level were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because those at the eighth level are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if those who have entered the stream were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because those who have entered the stream are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if once-returners were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because once-returners are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if non-returners were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because non-returners are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if arhats were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because arhats are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if pratyekabuddhas were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because pratyekabuddhas are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if bodhisattvas were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because bodhisattvas are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. 
“Subhūti, if the realm of phenomena were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the realm of phenomena is a nonentity and not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the real nature were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the real nature is a nonentity and not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the very limit of reality were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the very limit of reality is a nonentity and not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. Subhūti, if the realm of the inconceivable were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the realm of the inconceivable is a nonentity and not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the world with its gods, humans, and asuras were an entity and not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the world with its gods, humans, and asuras is a nonentity and not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the instances of setting the mind on enlightenment, as many as there are, by bodhisattva great beings, starting from their first setting of the mind on enlightenment up to being seated at the site of enlightenment, were entities and not nonentities, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the instances of setting the mind on enlightenment, as many as there are, by bodhisattva great beings, starting from their first setting of the mind on enlightenment up to being seated at the site of enlightenment, are nonentities, not entities, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the vajra-like transcendental knowledge of bodhisattva great beings were an entity and a not a nonentity, then indeed this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the vajra-like transcendental knowledge of bodhisattva great beings is a nonentity and not an entity, this Great Vehicle therefore does outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. 
“Subhūti, if the vajra-like transcendental knowledge of bodhisattva great beings were an entity and a not a nonentity, then indeed bodhisattva great beings would not realize that all the propensities for afflicted mental states that cause linking up are nonentities and would not acquire all-aspect omniscience, and this Great Vehicle would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attain emancipation. However, Subhūti, because the vajra-like transcendental knowledge of bodhisattva great beings is a nonentity and not an entity, bodhisattva great beings therefore do realize that all the propensities for afflicted mental states that cause linking up are nonentities and do indeed acquire all-aspect omniscience, and this Great Vehicle outshines the world with its gods, humans, and asuras and attains emancipation.
“Subhūti, if the thirty-two major marks of bodhisattva great beings were entities and not nonentities, then indeed the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas would not outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras, and would not illuminate, would not radiate, and would not shine with their magnificence and glory. However, Subhūti, because the thirty-two major marks of a great person that the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas possess are nonentities, not entities, therefore the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas do indeed outshine the world with its gods, humans, and asuras, and illuminate, radiate, and shine with their magnificence and glory.
“Subhūti, if the light of the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas were an entity and not a nonentity, then the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas would not permeate worlds as numerous as the grains of sand of the river Gaṅgā with their luminosity. However, Subhūti, because the light of the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas is a nonentity and not an entity, therefore the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas do permeate worlds as numerous as the grains of sand of the river Gaṅgā with their luminosity.
“Subhūti, if the voice of a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha with its sixty aspects were an entity and not a nonentity, then the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas in worlds as numerous as the grains of sand of the river Gaṅgā would not have made themselves heard with their voice. However, Subhūti, because the voice of a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha with its sixty aspects is a nonentity and not an entity, therefore the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas in worlds as numerous as the grains of sand of the river Gaṅgā do make themselves heard with their voice.
“Subhūti, if the wheel of the Dharma of tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas were an entity and not a nonentity, then the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas would not turn in the world that wheel of the Dharma that no virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else could have turned in conformity with the Dharma. However, Subhūti, because the wheel of the Dharma of tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas is a nonentity and not an entity, therefore the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas do turn in the world that wheel of the Dharma that no virtuous ascetic, brahmin priest, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else could have turned in conformity with the Dharma.
“Subhūti, if the beings for whom the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas turn the wheel of the Dharma were entities and not nonentities, then those beings would not enter final nirvāṇa in the expanse of nirvāṇa with no residual aggregates. However, Subhūti, because the beings for whom the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas turn the wheel of the Dharma are nonentities, not entities, therefore those beings have entered final nirvāṇa, are entering final nirvāṇa, and will enter final nirvāṇa, in the expanse of nirvāṇa with no residue of the aggregates.
“Subhūti, you said, ‘This Great Vehicle is the same as space.’ So it is, Subhūti, so it is! This vehicle is the same as space.
“To illustrate, Subhūti, in space the eastern direction is not apprehended, and the southern direction, the western direction, the northern direction, the zenith, the nadir, and the intermediate directions are not apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, in this Great Vehicle, the eastern direction is not apprehended, and the southern direction, the western direction, the northern direction, the zenith, the nadir, and the intermediate directions are not apprehended. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither long, nor short, nor round, nor square, nor symmetrical, nor asymmetrical. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither long, nor short, nor round, nor square, nor symmetrical, nor asymmetrical. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither blue, nor yellow, nor red, nor white, nor crimson, nor crystalline, nor silver. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither blue, nor yellow, nor red, nor white, nor crimson, nor crystalline, nor silver. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is not the past, the future, or the present. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is not the past, the future, or the present. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space neither decreases nor increases, neither diminishes nor expands. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, neither decreases nor increases, neither diminishes nor expands. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is not defiled nor is it purified. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is not defiled nor is it purified. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space neither arises, nor does it cease, nor does it last, nor does it reach an end, nor does it last and then change into something else. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, neither arises, nor does it cease, nor does it last, nor does it reach an end, nor does it last and then change into something else. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither virtuous nor nonvirtuous, and it is neither determinate nor indeterminate. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither virtuous nor nonvirtuous, and it is neither determinate nor indeterminate. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is not seen, nor is it heard, nor known, nor cognized. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is not seen, nor is it heard, nor known, nor cognized. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither an object of knowledge nor not an object of knowledge, nor is it an object of understanding, nor is it an object of comprehension, nor is it an object to be actualized, nor is it an object to be abandoned, nor is it an object to be cultivated. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither an object of knowledge nor not an object of knowledge, nor is it an object of understanding, nor is it an object of comprehension, nor is it an object to be actualized, nor is it an object to be abandoned, nor is it an object to be cultivated. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither a maturation, nor is it subject to maturation. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither a maturation, nor is it subject to maturation. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither included within the realm of desire, nor is it included within the realm of form, nor is it included within the realm of formlessness. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither included within the realm of desire, nor is it included within the realm of form, nor is it included within the realm of formlessness. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is not greedy nor is it free from greed, is not hateful nor is it free from hate, and is not deluded nor is it free from delusion. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is not greedy nor is it free from greed, is not hateful nor is it free from hate, and is not deluded nor is it free from delusion. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, in space there is no first setting of the mind on enlightenment, nor is there the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, the eighth, the ninth, or the tenth setting of the mind on enlightenment. Similarly, Subhūti, in this Great Vehicle, too, there is no first setting of the mind on enlightenment, nor is there the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, the eighth, the ninth, or the tenth setting of the mind on enlightenment. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, in space there is no level of bright insight, nor is there the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, or the level of spiritual achievement. Similarly, Subhūti, in this Great Vehicle, too, there is no level of bright insight, nor is there the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, or the level of spiritual achievement. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, in space there is no fruit of having entered the stream, nor is there the fruit of once-returner, the fruit of non-returner, or arhatship. Similarly, Subhūti, in this Great Vehicle, too, there is no fruit of having entered the stream, nor is there the fruit of once-returner, the fruit of non-returner, or arhatship. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, in space there is no level of the śrāvakas, nor is there the level of the pratyekabuddhas, the level of the bodhisattvas, or the level of the perfectly complete buddhas. Similarly, Subhūti, in this Great Vehicle, too, there is no level of the śrāvakas, nor is there the level of the pratyekabuddhas, the level of the bodhisattvas, or the level of the perfectly complete buddhas. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space does not have form, nor is it formless; is neither revealed, nor is it unrevealed; is neither obstructed, nor is it unobstructed; and neither is it united, nor is it separated. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, does not have form, nor is it formless; is neither revealed, nor is it unrevealed; is neither obstructed, nor is it unobstructed; and neither is it united, nor is it separated. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither permanent, nor is it impermanent; is neither happiness, nor is it suffering; neither has a self, nor is it selfless; and is neither pleasant, nor is it unpleasant. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither permanent, nor is it impermanent; is neither happiness, nor is it suffering; neither has a self, nor is it selfless; and is neither pleasant, nor is it unpleasant. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither empty, nor is it not empty; it is neither with a sign, nor is it without a sign; and it does not have aspirations, nor is it without aspirations. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither empty, nor is it not empty; it is neither with a sign, nor is it without a sign; and it does not have aspirations, nor is it without aspirations. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither at peace, nor is it not at peace, and neither is it void, nor is it not void. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither at peace, nor is it not at peace, and neither is it void, nor is it not void. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither light, nor is it darkness. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither light, nor is it darkness. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space can neither be apprehended, nor can it not be apprehended. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, can neither be apprehended, nor can it not be apprehended. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’
“To illustrate, Subhūti, space is neither expressible, nor is it inexpressible. Similarly, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither expressible, nor is it inexpressible. Therefore, it is said that ‘this vehicle is the same as space.’ 
“For these reasons, Subhūti, this vehicle is the same as space. Such is the Great Vehicle. 
“Subhūti, you said, ‘Just as space gives space to countless, immeasurable beings, similarly this Great Vehicle also gives space to countless, immeasurable beings.’ That is so, Subhūti, that is so! Just as space gives space to countless, immeasurable beings, similarly this Great Vehicle, too, gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, you should know, Subhūti, that space is nonexistent because beings are nonexistent; you should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings, the Great Vehicle, and space all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that space is immeasurable because beings are immeasurable. You should know that the Great Vehicle is immeasurable because space is immeasurable. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings, the Great Vehicle, and space all cannot be apprehended.
“If you ask why, Subhūti, you should know that space is unfathomable because beings are unfathomable. You should know that the Great Vehicle is unfathomable because space is unfathomable. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings, the Great Vehicle, and space all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that the realm of phenomena is nonexistent because beings are nonexistent; you should know that space is nonexistent because the realm of phenomena is nonexistent; you should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent; you should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings, the realm of phenomena, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that the real nature is nonexistent because beings are nonexistent; you should know that space is nonexistent because the real nature is nonexistent; you should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent; you should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings, the true nature, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the very limit of reality is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that space is nonexistent because the very limit of reality is nonexistent; you should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent; you should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the very limit of reality, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended. 
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that physical forms are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that feelings are nonexistent because physical forms are nonexistent; you should know that perceptions are nonexistent because feelings are nonexistent; you should know that formative predispositions are nonexistent because perceptions are nonexistent; you should know that consciousness is nonexistent because formative predispositions are nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because consciousness is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, consciousness, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that the eyes are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the ears are nonexistent because the eyes are nonexistent; you should know that the nose is nonexistent because the ears are nonexistent; you should know that the tongue is nonexistent because the nose is nonexistent; you should know that the body is nonexistent because the tongue is nonexistent; you should know that the mental faculty is nonexistent because the body is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because the mental faculty is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent.
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, the mental faculty, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that sights are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that sounds are nonexistent because sights are nonexistent; you should know that odors are nonexistent because sounds are nonexistent; you should know that tastes are nonexistent because odors are nonexistent; you should know that tangibles are nonexistent because tastes are nonexistent; you should know that mental phenomena are nonexistent because tangibles are nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because mental phenomena are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, sights, sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, mental phenomena, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that visual consciousness is nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that auditory consciousness is nonexistent because visual consciousness is nonexistent; you should know that olfactory consciousness is nonexistent because auditory consciousness is nonexistent; you should know that gustatory consciousness is nonexistent because olfactory consciousness is nonexistent; you should know that tactile consciousness is nonexistent because gustatory consciousness is nonexistent; you should know that mental consciousness is nonexistent because tactile consciousness is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because mental consciousness is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, olfactory consciousness, gustatory consciousness, tactile consciousness, mental consciousness, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that visually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that aurally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent because visually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent; you should know that nasally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent because aurally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent; you should know that lingually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent because nasally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent; you should know that corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent because lingually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent; you should know that mentally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent because corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because mentally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, visually compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact, lingually compounded sensory contact, corporeally compounded sensory contact, mentally compounded sensory contact, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent; you should know that feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent; you should know that feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent; you should know that feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent; you should know that feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that the earth element is nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the water element is nonexistent because the earth element is nonexistent; you should know that the fire element is nonexistent because the water element is nonexistent; you should know that the wind element is nonexistent because the fire element is nonexistent; you should know that the space element is nonexistent because the wind element is nonexistent; you should know that the consciousness element is nonexistent because the space element is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because the consciousness element is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, the consciousness element, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that ignorance is nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that formative predispositions are nonexistent because ignorance is nonexistent; you should know that consciousness is nonexistent because formative predispositions are nonexistent; you should know that name and form are nonexistent because consciousness is nonexistent; you should know that the six sense fields are nonexistent because name and form are nonexistent; you should know that sensory contact is nonexistent because the six sense fields are nonexistent; you should know that sensation is nonexistent because sensory contact is nonexistent; you should know that craving is nonexistent because sensation is nonexistent; you should know that grasping is nonexistent because craving is nonexistent; you should know that the rebirth process is nonexistent because grasping is nonexistent; you should know that birth is nonexistent because the rebirth process is nonexistent; you should know that aging and death are nonexistent because the rebirth process is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because aging and death are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, grasping, the rebirth process, birth, aging and death, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that the perfection of generosity is nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the perfection of ethical discipline is nonexistent because the perfection of generosity is nonexistent; you should know that the perfection of tolerance is nonexistent because the perfection of ethical discipline is nonexistent; you should know that the perfection of perseverance is nonexistent because the perfection of tolerance is nonexistent; you should know that the perfection of meditative concentration is nonexistent because the perfection of perseverance is nonexistent; you should know that the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent because the perfection of meditative concentration is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of meditative concentration, the perfection of wisdom, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that the emptiness of internal phenomena is nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of external phenomena is nonexistent because the emptiness of internal phenomena is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonexistent because the emptiness of external phenomena is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of emptiness is nonexistent because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of great extent is nonexistent because the emptiness of emptiness is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonexistent because the emptiness of great extent is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonexistent because the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonexistent because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of the unlimited is nonexistent because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonexistent because the emptiness of the unlimited is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonexistent because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of inherent nature is nonexistent because the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of all phenomena is nonexistent because the emptiness of inherent nature is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonexistent because the emptiness of all phenomena is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonexistent because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of nonentities is nonexistent because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of essential nature is nonexistent because the emptiness of nonentities is nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonexistent because the emptiness of essential nature is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the emptiness of nonentities, the emptiness of essential nature, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the correct exertions are nonexistent because the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent; you should know that the supports for miraculous ability are nonexistent because the correct exertions are nonexistent; you should know that the faculties are nonexistent because the supports for miraculous ability are nonexistent; you should know that the powers are nonexistent because the faculties are nonexistent; you should know that the branches of enlightenment are nonexistent because the powers are nonexistent; you should know that the noble eightfold path is nonexistent because the branches of enlightenment are nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because the noble eightfold path is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that the truths of the noble ones are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the meditative concentrations are nonexistent because the truths of the noble ones are nonexistent; you should know that the immeasurable attitudes are nonexistent because the meditative concentrations are nonexistent; you should know that the formless absorptions are nonexistent because the immeasurable attitudes are nonexistent; you should know that the liberations are nonexistent because the formless absorptions are nonexistent; you should know that the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonexistent because the liberations are nonexistent; you should know that the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonexistent because the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonexistent; you should know that the extrasensory powers are nonexistent because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonexistent; you should know that the meditative stabilities are nonexistent because the extrasensory powers are nonexistent; you should know that the dhāraṇī gateways are nonexistent because the meditative stabilities are nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because the dhāraṇī gateways are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, one who lives, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the eight liberations, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, the extrasensory powers, the meditative stabilities, the dhāraṇī gateways, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that the powers of the tathāgatas are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the fearlessnesses are nonexistent because the powers of the tathāgatas are nonexistent; you should know that the kinds of exact knowledge are nonexistent because the fearlessnesses are nonexistent; you should know that great compassion is nonexistent because the kinds of exact knowledge are nonexistent; you should know that the distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonexistent because great compassion is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the powers of the tathāgatas, the fearlessnesses, the kinds of exact knowledge, great compassion, the distinct qualities of the buddhas, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that the level of the spiritual family is nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the eighth level is nonexistent because the level of the spiritual family is nonexistent; you should know that the level of insight is nonexistent because the eighth level is nonexistent; you should know that the level of attenuated refinement is nonexistent because the level of insight is nonexistent; you should know that the level of no attachment is nonexistent because the level of attenuated refinement is nonexistent; you should know that the level of spiritual achievement is nonexistent because the level of no attachment is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because the level of spiritual achievement is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, the level of spiritual achievement, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that those who have entered the stream are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that once-returners are nonexistent because those who have entered the stream are nonexistent; you should know that non-returners are nonexistent because once-returners are nonexistent; you should know that arhats are nonexistent because non-returners are nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because arhats are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, those who have entered the stream, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know that pratyekabuddhas are nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that perfectly complete buddhas are nonexistent because pratyekabuddhas are nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because perfectly complete buddhas are nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, pratyekabuddhas, perfectly complete buddhas, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, you should know that a being is nonexistent because the self is nonexistent; you should know that a life form is nonexistent because a being is nonexistent; you should know that a living being is nonexistent because a life form is nonexistent; you should know that a life is nonexistent because a living being is nonexistent; you should know that an individual is nonexistent because a life is nonexistent; you should know that a person is nonexistent because an individual is nonexistent; you should know that one born of Manu is nonexistent because a person is nonexistent; you should know that a child of Manu is nonexistent because one born of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an agent is nonexistent because a child of Manu is nonexistent; you should know that an experiencer is nonexistent because an agent is nonexistent; you should know that a knower is nonexistent because an experiencer is nonexistent; you should know that a viewer is nonexistent because a knower is nonexistent; and you should know that the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent because a viewer is nonexistent. You should know the vehicle of the śrāvakas is nonexistent because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent; you should know that the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas is nonexistent because the vehicle of the śrāvakas is nonexistent; you should know that the vehicle of the buddhas is nonexistent because the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas is nonexistent; you should know that all-aspect omniscience is nonexistent because the vehicle of the buddhas is nonexistent; and you should know that space is nonexistent because all-aspect omniscience is nonexistent. You should know that the Great Vehicle is nonexistent because space is nonexistent. You should know that the immeasurable is nonexistent because the Great Vehicle is nonexistent; you should know that the countless is nonexistent because the immeasurable is nonexistent; you should know that the unfathomable is nonexistent because the countless is nonexistent; and you should know that all phenomena are nonexistent because the unfathomable is nonexistent. 
“For this reason, too, Subhūti, this Great Vehicle gives space to countless, immeasurable beings. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the self, a being, a life form, a living being, a life, an individual, a person, one born of Manu, a child of Manu, an agent, an experiencer, a knower, a viewer, the realm of the inconceivable, the vehicle of the śrāvakas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, the vehicle of the buddhas, all-aspect omniscience, space, the Great Vehicle, the immeasurable, the countless, the unfathomable, and all phenomena, they all cannot be apprehended.
“To illustrate, Subhūti, just as the realm of nirvāṇa gives space to immeasurable, countless, unfathomable beings, similarly this Great Vehicle, too, gives space to immeasurable, countless, unfathomable beings. Subhūti, just as space gives space to immeasurable, countless, unfathomable beings, similarly this Great Vehicle, too, gives space to immeasurable, countless, unfathomable beings.
“Subhūti, you said, ‘In this Great Vehicle, “going and coming” are nonexistent, and “standing still” is nonexistent.’ So it is, Subhūti, so it is! In this Great Vehicle going and coming are nonexistent, and standing still too is nonexistent. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because all phenomena are unmoving. They do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. 
“If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because physical forms do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of physical forms does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of physical forms does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of physical forms does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of physical forms do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Feelings do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of feelings does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of feelings does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of feelings does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of feelings do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Perceptions do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of perceptions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of perceptions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of perceptions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of perceptions do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Formative predispositions do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of formative predispositions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of formative predispositions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of formative predispositions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of formative predispositions do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Consciousness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of consciousness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere.
“The eyes do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the eyes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the eyes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the eyes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the eyes do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The ears do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the ears does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the ears does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the ears does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the ears do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The nose does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the nose does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the nose does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the nose does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the nose do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The tongue does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the tongue does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the tongue does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the tongue does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the tongue do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The body does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the body does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the body does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the body does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the body do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The mental faculty does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the mental faculty does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the mental faculty does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the mental faculty does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the mental faculty do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“Sights do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of sights does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of sights does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of sights does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of sights do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Sounds do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of sounds does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of sounds does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of sounds does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of sounds do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Odors do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of odors does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of odors does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of odors does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of odors do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Tastes do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of tastes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of tastes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of tastes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of tastes do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Tangibles do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of tangibles does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of tangibles does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of tangibles does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of tangibles do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Mental phenomena do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of mental phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of mental phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of mental phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of mental phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“Visual consciousness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of visual consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of visual consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of visual consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of visual consciousness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Auditory consciousness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of auditory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of auditory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of auditory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of auditory consciousness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Olfactory consciousness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of olfactory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of olfactory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of olfactory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of olfactory consciousness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Gustatory consciousness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of gustatory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of gustatory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of gustatory consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of gustatory consciousness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Tactile consciousness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of tactile consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of tactile consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of tactile consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of tactile consciousness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Mental consciousness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of mental consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of mental consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of mental consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of mental consciousness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere.
“Visually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of visually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of visually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of visually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of visually compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Aurally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of aurally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of aurally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of aurally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of aurally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Nasally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of nasally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of nasally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of nasally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of nasally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Lingually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of lingually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of lingually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of lingually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of lingually compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Corporeally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of corporeally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of corporeally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of corporeally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of corporeally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Mentally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of mentally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of mentally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of mentally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of mentally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere.
“Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“The earth element does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the earth element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the earth element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the earth element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the earth element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The water element does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the water element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the water element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the water element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the water element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The fire element does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the fire element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the fire element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the fire element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the fire element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The wind element does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the wind element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the wind element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the wind element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the wind element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The space element does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the space element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the space element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the space element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the space element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The consciousness element does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the consciousness element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the consciousness element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the consciousness element does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the consciousness element do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere.
“Ignorance does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of ignorance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of ignorance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of ignorance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of ignorance do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Formative predispositions do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of formative predispositions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of formative predispositions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of formative predispositions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of formative predispositions do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Consciousness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of consciousness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of consciousness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Name and form do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of name and form does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of name and form does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of name and form does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of name and form do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The six sense fields do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the six sense fields does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the six sense fields does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the six sense fields does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the six sense fields do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Sensory contact does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of sensory contact does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of sensory contact do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Sensation does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of sensation does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of sensation does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of sensation does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of sensation do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Craving does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of craving does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of craving does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of craving does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of craving do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Grasping does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of grasping does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of grasping does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of grasping does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of grasping do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The rebirth process does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the rebirth process does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the rebirth process does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the rebirth process does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the rebirth process do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Birth does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of birth does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of birth does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of birth does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of birth do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Aging and death do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of aging and death does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of aging and death does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of aging and death does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of aging and death do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“The perfection of generosity does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the perfection of generosity does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the perfection of generosity does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the perfection of generosity does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the perfection of generosity do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The perfection of ethical discipline does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the perfection of ethical discipline does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the perfection of ethical discipline does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the perfection of ethical discipline does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the perfection of ethical discipline do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The perfection of tolerance does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the perfection of tolerance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the perfection of tolerance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the perfection of tolerance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the perfection of tolerance do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The perfection of perseverance does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the perfection of perseverance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the perfection of perseverance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the perfection of perseverance does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the perfection of perseverance do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The perfection of meditative concentration does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the perfection of meditative concentration does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the perfection of meditative concentration does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the perfection of meditative concentration does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the perfection of meditative concentration do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The perfection of wisdom does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the perfection of wisdom does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the perfection of wisdom does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the perfection of wisdom does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the perfection of wisdom do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of internal phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of internal phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of internal phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of internal phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of external phenomena does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of external phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of external phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of external phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of external phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of emptiness does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of emptiness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of emptiness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of emptiness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of emptiness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of great extent does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of great extent does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of great extent does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of great extent does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of great extent do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of ultimate reality does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of ultimate reality does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of ultimate reality does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of ultimate reality does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of ultimate reality do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of the unlimited does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of the unlimited does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of the unlimited does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of the unlimited does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of the unlimited do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of nonexclusion does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of nonexclusion does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of nonexclusion does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of nonexclusion does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of nonexclusion do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of inherent nature does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of inherent nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of inherent nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of inherent nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of inherent nature do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of all phenomena does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of all phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of all phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of all phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of all phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of nonentities does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of nonentities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of nonentities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of nonentities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of nonentities do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of essential nature does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of essential nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of essential nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of essential nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of essential nature do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere.
“The applications of mindfulness do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the applications of mindfulness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the applications of mindfulness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the applications of mindfulness do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The correct exertions do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the correct exertions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the correct exertions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the correct exertions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the correct exertions do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The supports for miraculous ability do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the supports for miraculous ability does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the supports for miraculous ability does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the supports for miraculous ability does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the supports for miraculous ability do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. the faculties do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the faculties does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the faculties does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the faculties does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the faculties do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. the powers do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the powers does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the powers does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the powers does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the powers do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The branches of enlightenment do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the branches of enlightenment does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the branches of enlightenment does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the branches of enlightenment does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the branches of enlightenment do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The noble eightfold path does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the noble eightfold path does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the noble eightfold path does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the noble eightfold path does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the noble eightfold path do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“The truths of the noble ones do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the truths of the noble ones does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the truths of the noble ones does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the truths of the noble ones does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the truths of the noble ones do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The meditative concentrations do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the meditative concentrations does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the meditative concentrations does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the meditative concentrations does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the meditative concentrations do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The immeasurable attitudes do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the immeasurable attitudes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the immeasurable attitudes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the immeasurable attitudes does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the immeasurable attitudes do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The formless absorptions do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the formless absorptions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the formless absorptions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the formless absorptions does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the formless absorptions do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The liberations do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the liberations does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the liberations does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the liberations does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the liberations do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The serial steps of meditative absorption do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the serial steps of meditative absorption does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the serial steps of meditative absorption does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the serial steps of meditative absorption does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the serial steps of meditative absorption do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The extrasensory powers do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the extrasensory powers does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the extrasensory powers does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the extrasensory powers does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the extrasensory powers do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The meditative stabilities do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the meditative stabilities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the meditative stabilities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the meditative stabilities does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the meditative stabilities do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The dhāraṇī gateways do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the dhāraṇī gateways does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the dhāraṇī gateways does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the dhāraṇī gateways does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the dhāraṇī gateways do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The ten powers of the tathāgatas do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the powers of the tathāgatas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the powers of the tathāgatas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the powers of the tathāgatas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the powers of the tathāgatas do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The four fearlessnesses do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the fearlessnesses does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the fearlessnesses does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the fearlessnesses does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the fearlessnesses do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The four kinds of exact knowledge do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the kinds of exact knowledge does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the kinds of exact knowledge does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the kinds of exact knowledge does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the kinds of exact knowledge do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. Great compassion does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of great compassion does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of great compassion does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of great compassion does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of great compassion do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“The eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the distinct qualities of the buddhas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the distinct qualities of the buddhas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the distinct qualities of the buddhas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the distinct qualities of the buddhas do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“The realm of phenomena does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the realm of phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the realm of phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the realm of phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the realm of phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The real nature does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the real nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the real nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the real nature does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the real nature do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The very limit of reality does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the very limit of reality does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the very limit of reality does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the very limit of reality does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the very limit of reality do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. The realm of the inconceivable does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the realm of the inconceivable does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the realm of the inconceivable does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the realm of the inconceivable does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the realm of the inconceivable do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“Enlightenment does not come from anywhere, it does not go anywhere, and it does not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of enlightenment does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of enlightenment does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of enlightenment does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of enlightenment do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“The buddhas do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of the buddhas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of the buddhas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of the buddhas does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of the buddhas do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“Conditioned phenomena do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of conditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of conditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of conditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of conditioned phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“Unconditioned phenomena do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not stand still anywhere. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because the inherent nature of unconditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the real nature of unconditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; the essential nature of unconditioned phenomena does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not stand still anywhere; and the intrinsic defining characteristics of unconditioned phenomena do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not stand still anywhere. 
“Subhūti, you said, ‘For this Great Vehicle … the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and a middle cannot be apprehended … it is a vehicle that is the sameness of the three times; that is why it is called a Great Vehicle.’ That is so, Subhūti, that is so! For this Great Vehicle the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and a middle cannot be apprehended. It is a vehicle that is the sameness of the three times; that is why it is called a Great Vehicle. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time is empty of past time; future time, too, is empty of future time; and present time, too, is empty of present time. The sameness of the three times, too, is empty of the sameness of the three times. The Great Vehicle, too, is empty of the Great Vehicle. A bodhisattva, too, is empty of a bodhisattva.
“Subhūti, in emptiness ‘one’ does not exist, ‘two’ does not exist, ‘three’ does not exist, ‘four’ does not exist, ‘five’ does not exist, ‘six’ does not exist, ‘seven’ does not exist, ‘eight’ does not exist, ‘nine’ does not exist, ‘ten’ does not exist, and ‘different’ does not exist. 
“So, this is the vehicle of bodhisattva great beings that is a sameness. In it ‘the same’ and ‘not the same’ cannot be apprehended. In it desire and the absence of desire cannot be apprehended, hatred and the absence of hatred cannot be apprehended, delusion and the absence of delusion cannot be apprehended, names and the absence of names cannot be apprehended, conditioned phenomena and unconditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended, virtues and nonvirtues cannot be apprehended, basic transgressions and not basic transgressions cannot be apprehended, contaminated and uncontaminated cannot be apprehended, defilement and the absence of defilement cannot be apprehended, mundane and supramundane cannot be apprehended, arising and ceasing cannot be apprehended, and defilement and purification cannot be apprehended. In it permanence and impermanence cannot be apprehended, happiness and suffering cannot be apprehended, self and selflessness cannot be apprehended, and peace and the absence of peace cannot be apprehended. The realm of desire and the transcendence of the realm of desire cannot be apprehended, the realm of form and the transcendence of the realm of form cannot be apprehended, the realm of formlessness and the transcendence of the realm of formlessness cannot be apprehended, and saṃsāra and nirvāṇa cannot be apprehended. If you ask why, it is because its own essential nature cannot be apprehended.
“Subhūti, past physical forms are empty of past physical forms. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, past physical forms cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could past physical forms ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, past feelings are empty of past feelings. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, past feelings cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could past feelings ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, past perceptions are empty of past perceptions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, past perceptions cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could past perceptions ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, past formative predispositions are empty of past formative predispositions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, past formative predispositions cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could past formative predispositions ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, past consciousness is empty of past consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, past consciousness cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could past consciousness ever be apprehended in emptiness?
“Subhūti, future physical forms are empty of future physical forms. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, future physical forms cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could future physical forms ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, future feelings are empty of future feelings. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, future feelings cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could future feelings ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, future perceptions are empty of future perceptions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, future perceptions cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could future perceptions ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, future formative predispositions are empty of future formative predispositions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, future formative predispositions cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could future formative predispositions ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, future consciousness is empty of future consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, future consciousness cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could future consciousness ever be apprehended in emptiness?
“Subhūti, present physical forms are empty of present physical forms. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, present physical forms cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could present physical forms ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, present feelings are empty of present feelings. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, present feelings cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could present feelings ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, present perceptions are empty of present perceptions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, present perceptions cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could present perceptions ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, present formative predispositions are empty of present formative predispositions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, present formative predispositions cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could present formative predispositions ever be apprehended in emptiness? Subhūti, present consciousness is empty of present consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness, present consciousness cannot be apprehended. If even emptiness cannot be apprehended, because it is empty of emptiness, how could present consciousness ever be apprehended in emptiness?
“Subhūti, the perfection of generosity cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the perfection of generosity cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the perfection of generosity cannot be apprehended in the present, and the perfection of generosity cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness? Subhūti, the perfection of ethical discipline cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the perfection of ethical discipline cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the perfection of ethical discipline cannot be apprehended in the present, and the perfection of ethical discipline cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness? Subhūti, the perfection of tolerance cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the perfection of tolerance cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the perfection of tolerance cannot be apprehended in the present, and the perfection of tolerance cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness? Subhūti, the perfection of perseverance cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the perfection of perseverance cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the perfection of perseverance cannot be apprehended in the present, and the perfection of perseverance cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness? Subhūti, the perfection of meditative concentration cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the perfection of meditative concentration cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the perfection of meditative concentration cannot be apprehended in the present, and the perfection of meditative concentration cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness? Subhūti, the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended in the present, and the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of internal phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of internal phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of internal phenomena cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of internal phenomena cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of external phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of external phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of external phenomena cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of external phenomena cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of external and internal phenomena cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of emptiness cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of emptiness cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of emptiness cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of emptiness cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of great extent cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of great extent cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of great extent cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of great extent cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of ultimate reality cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of ultimate reality cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of ultimate reality cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of ultimate reality cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of conditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of the unlimited cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of the unlimited cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of the unlimited cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of the unlimited cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of nonexclusion cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of nonexclusion cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of nonexclusion cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of nonexclusion cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of inherent nature cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of inherent nature cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of inherent nature cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of inherent nature cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of all phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of all phenomena cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of all phenomena cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of all phenomena cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of nonentities cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of nonentities cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of nonentities cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of nonentities cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of essential nature cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of essential nature cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of essential nature cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of essential nature cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities cannot be apprehended in the present, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the applications of mindfulness cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the applications of mindfulness cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the applications of mindfulness cannot be apprehended in the present, and the applications of mindfulness cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the correct exertions cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the correct exertions cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the correct exertions cannot be apprehended in the present, and the correct exertions cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness? 
“Subhūti, the supports for miraculous ability cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the supports for miraculous ability cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the supports for miraculous ability cannot be apprehended in the present, and the supports for miraculous ability cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the faculties cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the faculties cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the faculties cannot be apprehended in the present, and the faculties cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the powers cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the powers cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the powers cannot be apprehended in the present, and the powers cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the branches of enlightenment cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the branches of enlightenment cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the branches of enlightenment cannot be apprehended in the present, and the branches of enlightenment cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the noble eightfold path cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the noble eightfold path cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the noble eightfold path cannot be apprehended in the present, and the noble eightfold path cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the truths of the noble ones cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the truths of the noble ones cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the truths of the noble ones cannot be apprehended in the present, and the truths of the noble ones cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the meditative concentrations cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the meditative concentrations cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the meditative concentrations cannot be apprehended in the present, and the meditative concentrations cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the immeasurable attitudes cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the immeasurable attitudes cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the immeasurable attitudes cannot be apprehended in the present, and the immeasurable attitudes cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the formless absorptions cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the formless absorptions cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the formless absorptions cannot be apprehended in the present, and the formless absorptions cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the eight liberations cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the eight liberations cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the eight liberations cannot be apprehended in the present, and the eight liberations cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption cannot be apprehended in the present, and the nine serial steps of meditative absorption cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation cannot be apprehended in the present; and the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the extrasensory powers cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the extrasensory powers cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the extrasensory powers cannot be apprehended in the present, and the extrasensory powers cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the meditative stabilities cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the meditative stabilities cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the meditative stabilities cannot be apprehended in the present, and the meditative stabilities cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the dhāraṇī gateways cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the dhāraṇī gateways cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the dhāraṇī gateways cannot be apprehended in the present, and the dhāraṇī gateways cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the ten powers of the tathāgatas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the ten powers of the tathāgatas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the ten powers of the tathāgatas cannot be apprehended in the present, and the ten powers of the tathāgatas cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the four fearlessnesses cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the four fearlessnesses cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the four fearlessnesses cannot be apprehended in the present, and the four fearlessnesses cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the four kinds of exact knowledge cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the four kinds of exact knowledge cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the four kinds of exact knowledge cannot be apprehended in the present, and the four kinds of exact knowledge cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, great loving kindness cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, great loving kindness cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, great loving kindness cannot be apprehended in the present, and great loving kindness cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, great compassion cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, great compassion cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, great compassion cannot be apprehended in the present, and great compassion cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Subhūti, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas cannot be apprehended in the present, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because past time cannot be apprehended in sameness, future time cannot be apprehended in sameness, and present time cannot be apprehended in sameness. If even sameness cannot be apprehended in sameness, how could past time ever be apprehended in sameness, how could future time ever be apprehended in sameness, and how could present time ever be apprehended in sameness?
“Moreover, Subhūti, ordinary people cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, ordinary people cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, ordinary people cannot be apprehended in the present, and ordinary people cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings cannot be apprehended. Moreover, Subhūti, śrāvakas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, śrāvakas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, śrāvakas cannot be apprehended in the present, and śrāvakas cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings cannot be apprehended. Moreover, Subhūti, pratyekabuddhas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, pratyekabuddhas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, pratyekabuddhas cannot be apprehended in the present, and pratyekabuddhas cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings cannot be apprehended. Moreover, Subhūti, bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the present, and bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings cannot be apprehended.
“Moreover, Subhūti, tathāgatas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, tathāgatas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, tathāgatas cannot be apprehended in the present, and tathāgatas cannot be apprehended in the sameness of the three times. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because beings cannot be apprehended.”
Then Venerable Subhūti said to the Blessed One, “Blessed Lord, it is well and good, this Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings that the Blessed Lord has taught so well called ‘the sameness of the three times.’ Blessed Lord, bodhisattva great beings of the past, who have trained in this Great Vehicle, have acquired all-aspect omniscience; Blessed Lord, bodhisattva great beings of the future, also, having trained in just this perfection of wisdom, will acquire all-aspect omniscience; and, Blessed Lord, fathomless bodhisattva great beings in the immeasurable, countless world systems of the ten directions, having trained in just this Great Vehicle, are acquiring all-aspect omniscience. Blessed Lord, that is why the Great Vehicle of bodhisattva great beings is this one called ‘the sameness of the three times.’ ” 
Venerable Subhūti having spoken thus, the Lord said to him, “That is so, Subhūti, that is so! Having trained in this Great Vehicle, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas of the past, future, and present have acquired, will acquire, and are acquiring all-aspect omniscience.” 
This completes the eleventh chapter from The Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand Lines. 
Chapter 12
Then the venerable Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇīputra said to the Blessed One, “Blessed Lord, this elder Subhūti, who has been put in charge of the perfection of wisdom by the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha, thinks he is just to teach the Great Vehicle.”
The venerable Subhūti then said to the Blessed One, “Blessed Lord, I trust that I have not contradicted the perfection of wisdom while teaching the Great Vehicle.”
“Subhūti, you have not done so,” replied the Blessed One. “Subhūti, you do teach the Great Vehicle in conformity with the perfection of wisdom. If you ask why, Subhūti, it is because whatever virtuous attributes there are, be they the attributes of śrāvakas, the attributes of pratyekabuddhas, the attributes of bodhisattvas, or the attributes of buddhas, all of them are indeed gathered and included within the perfection of wisdom.”
Subhūti then asked, “Blessed Lord, what are virtuous attributes on the side of enlightenment that are gathered and included within the perfection of wisdom—what are the attributes of the śrāvakas like that, the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas, the attributes of the bodhisattvas, and the attributes of the buddhas?”
The Blessed One answered, “They are the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path; the four truths of the noble ones, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable attitudes, the four formless absorptions, and the six extrasensory powers; the perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of meditative concentration, and the perfection of wisdom; the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the emptiness of nonentities, the emptiness of essential nature, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; and all the meditative stabilities, all the dhāraṇī gateways, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four fearlessnesses, the four kinds of exact knowledge, great loving kindness, great compassion, great empathetic joy, great equanimity, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, the reality of phenomena that does not decline, and abiding in perpetual equanimity.
“Subhūti, these are held to be the virtuous attributes on the side of enlightenment that are gathered and included within the perfection of wisdom that are the attributes of the śrāvakas, the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas, the attributes of the bodhisattvas, and the attributes of the buddhas.
“Subhūti, the Great Vehicle, the perfection of wisdom, the perfection of meditative concentration, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of ethical discipline, and the perfection of generosity; physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness; the eyes, sights, visual consciousness, visually compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact; the ears, sounds, auditory consciousness, aurally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact; the nose, odors, olfactory consciousness, nasally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact; the tongue, tastes, gustatory consciousness, lingually compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact; the body, tangibles, tactile consciousness, corporeally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact; the mental faculty, mental phenomena, mental consciousness, mentally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact; ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, grasping, the rebirth process, birth, and aging and death; the perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of meditative concentration, and the perfection of wisdom; the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the emptiness of nonentities, the emptiness of essential nature, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path; the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the six extrasensory powers, the eight stations of mastery, the ten stations of complete suffusion, the eight liberations, and the nine serial steps of meditative absorption; suffering, the origin, the cessation, and the path; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, the meditative stabilities, the dhāraṇī gateways, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four fearlessnesses, the four kinds of exact knowledge, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas; the realm of desire, the realm of form, the realm of formlessness, virtuous phenomena, nonvirtuous phenomena, contaminated phenomena, uncontaminated phenomena, mundane phenomena, supramundane phenomena, conditioned phenomena, and unconditioned phenomena; the tathāgatas, and the Dharma and Vinaya taught by the tathāgatas; the realm of phenomena, the real nature, the very limit of reality, the realm of the inconceivable, and the realm of nirvāṇa—all of these are neither true nor not true, and they are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“For that reason, Subhūti, you do indeed teach the Great Vehicle in conformity with the perfection of wisdom. 
“If you ask why, it is because ‘the Great Vehicle is not one thing and the perfection of wisdom another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the perfection of wisdom are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the perfection of meditative concentration another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the perfection of meditative concentration are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the perfection of perseverance another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the perfection of perseverance are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the perfection of tolerance another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the perfection of tolerance are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the perfection of ethical discipline another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the perfection of ethical discipline are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the perfection of generosity another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the perfection of generosity are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“ ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of internal phenomena another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of internal phenomena are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of external phenomena another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of external phenomena are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of external and internal phenomena another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of external and internal phenomena are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of emptiness another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of emptiness are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of great extent another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of great extent are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of ultimate reality another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of ultimate reality are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of conditioned phenomena another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of conditioned phenomena are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of the unlimited another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of the unlimited are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of nonexclusion another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of nonexclusion are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of inherent nature another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of inherent nature are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of all phenomena another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of all phenomena are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of nonentities another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of nonentities are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of essential nature another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of essential nature are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“ ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the applications of mindfulness another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the applications of mindfulness are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the correct exertions another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the correct exertions are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the supports for miraculous ability another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the supports for miraculous ability are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the faculties another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the faculties are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the powers another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the powers are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the branches of enlightenment another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the branches of enlightenment are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the noble eightfold path another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the noble eightfold path are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“ ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the truths of the noble ones another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the truths of the noble ones are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the meditative concentrations another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the meditative concentrations are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the immeasurable attitudes another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the immeasurable attitudes are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the formless absorptions another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the formless absorptions are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the eight liberations another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the eight liberations are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the nine serial steps of meditative absorption another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the extrasensory powers another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the extrasensory powers are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the meditative stabilities another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the meditative stabilities are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the dhāraṇī gateways another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the dhāraṇī gateways are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“ ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the ten powers of the tathāgatas another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the powers of the tathāgatas are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the four fearlessnesses another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the fearlessnesses are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the four kinds of exact knowledge another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the kinds of exact knowledge are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and great compassion another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and great compassion are without duality and cannot be divided into two. ‘The Great Vehicle is not one thing and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas another,’ so, the Great Vehicle and the distinct qualities of the buddhas are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“For that reason, Subhūti, you do teach the Great Vehicle by teaching the perfection of wisdom, and you do teach the perfection of wisdom by teaching the Great Vehicle.”
Then the venerable Subhūti said to the Blessed One, “But still, Blessed Lord, bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. Bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. Bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. One should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because physical forms are beyond all limits. One should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because feelings are beyond all limits. One should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because perceptions are beyond all limits. One should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because formative predispositions are beyond all limits. One should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because consciousness is beyond all limits. 
“It cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘physical forms are a bodhisattva.’ It cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings are a bodhisattva.’ It cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘perceptions are a bodhisattva.’ It cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘formative predispositions are a bodhisattva.’ It cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘consciousness is a bodhisattva.’
“Blessed Lord, since in all respects, and in each and every way, I do not observe and do not apprehend a bodhisattva, then to which bodhisattvas should I give teaching and instruction in the perfection of wisdom? Since I do not observe and do not apprehend an actual bodhisattva even through the entirety [of all the attributes], to which bodhisattvas should I give teaching and instruction in the perfection of wisdom? 
“Moreover, Blessed Lord, one says ‘a bodhisattva.’ It is a mere name, yet, Blessed Lord, just as one says ‘a self, a self,’ even though there is no coming into being for a self, similarly, Blessed Lord, one says ‘a bodhisattva, a bodhisattva,’ even though there is no coming into being for a bodhisattva. So, given that phenomena are without essential nature, what physical forms that have come into being could there possibly be; what feelings that have come into being could there possibly be; what perceptions that have come into being could there possibly be; what formative predispositions that have come into being could there possibly be; and what consciousness that has come into being could there possibly be? Blessed Lord, something that has not come into being is not physical forms, something that has not come into being is not feelings, something that has not come into being is not perceptions, something that has not come into being is not formative predispositions, and something that has not come into being is not consciousness. This being the case, Blessed Lord, given that one cannot apprehend those bodhisattva great beings who are engaged in the pursuit of enlightenment as other than something that has not come into being, does something that has not come into being teach and give instructions in a perfection of wisdom that has also not come into being? If, when such teachings are given, the minds of bodhisattva great beings are not disheartened, not intimidated, and not regretful, and they are not afraid, not frightened, and not terrified, then these bodhisattva great beings are indeed practicing the perfection of wisdom.”
Then the venerable Śāradvatīputra inquired of the venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, why can bodhisattvas great beings not be apprehended at the limit of the past not, not be apprehended at the limit of the future, and not be apprehended in the middle? Venerable Subhūti, why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because physical forms are beyond all limits; that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because feelings are beyond all limits; that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because perceptions are beyond all limits; that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because formative predispositions are beyond all limits; and that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits because consciousness is beyond all limits?
“Venerable Subhūti, why can it not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘physical forms are a bodhisattva’; not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings are a bodhisattva’; not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘perceptions are a bodhisattva’; not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘formative predispositions are a bodhisattva’; and not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘consciousness is a bodhisattva’?
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘Since in all respects, and in each and every way, I do not observe and do not apprehend a bodhisattva great being, then to which bodhisattvas should I give teaching and instruction in the perfection of wisdom?’ Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘Since I do not observe and do not apprehend even just a bodhisattva as a whole, then to which bodhisattva great beings should I give teaching and instruction in what perfection of wisdom?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘Blessed Lord, one says “bodhisattva great being.” It is a mere name.’ Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘Just as one says “a self, a self,” even though a self does not come into being, similarly, Blessed Lord, one says ‘a bodhisattva, a bodhisattva,’ even though a bodhisattva does not come into being. So, given that phenomena are in their essential nature nonentities, what physical forms that have come into being could there possibly be; what feelings that have come into being could there possibly be; what perceptions that have come into being could there possibly be; what formative predispositions that have come into being could there possibly be; and what consciousness that has come into being could there possibly be? Something that has not come into being is not physical forms, something that has not come into being is not feelings, something that has not come into being is not perceptions, something that has not come into being is not formative predispositions, and something that has not come into being is not consciousness.’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘Does something that has not come into being teach and give instructions in a perfection of wisdom that has also not come into being?’ Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘One cannot apprehend those bodhisattva great beings as other than not having come into being’? And, Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘If, when such teachings are given, the minds of bodhisattva great beings are not disheartened, not intimidated, and not regretful, and they are not afraid, not frightened, and not terrified, then these bodhisattva great beings are indeed practicing the perfection of wisdom’?”
The venerable Śāradvatīputra having said this, the venerable Subhūti then responded, “Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because beings are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because beings are empty, beings are void, and beings are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because beings are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because beings are empty, beings are void, and beings are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because beings are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. It is because beings are empty, beings are void, and beings are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent beings, empty beings, void beings, and beings that are without inherent existence, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent beings are not one thing, empty beings another, void beings another, beings without inherent existence another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent beings, empty beings, void beings, beings without inherent existence, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because physical forms are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because physical forms are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because physical forms are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because physical forms are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because physical forms are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because physical forms are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because physical forms are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because physical forms are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because physical forms are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because physical forms are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because physical forms are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because physical forms are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent physical forms, physical forms that are emptiness, void physical forms, and physical forms that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent physical forms are not one thing, physical forms that are emptiness another, void physical forms another, physical forms that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent physical forms, physical forms that are emptiness, void physical forms, physical forms that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because feelings are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because feelings are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because feelings are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because feelings are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because feelings are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because feelings are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent feelings, feelings that are emptiness, void feelings, and feelings that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent feelings are not one thing, feelings that are emptiness another, void feelings another, feelings that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent feelings, feelings that are emptiness, void feelings, feelings that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because perceptions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because perceptions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because perceptions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because perceptions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because perceptions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because perceptions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because perceptions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because perceptions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because perceptions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because perceptions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because perceptions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because perceptions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent perceptions, perceptions that are emptiness, void perceptions, and perceptions that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent perceptions are not one thing, perceptions that are emptiness another, void perceptions another, perceptions that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent perceptions, perceptions that are emptiness, void perceptions, perceptions that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because formative predispositions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because formative predispositions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because formative predispositions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because formative predispositions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because formative predispositions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because formative predispositions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because formative predispositions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because formative predispositions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because formative predispositions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because formative predispositions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because formative predispositions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because formative predispositions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent formative predispositions, formative predispositions that are emptiness, void formative predispositions, and formative predispositions that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent formative predispositions are not one thing, formative predispositions that are emptiness another, void formative predispositions another, formative predispositions that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent formative predispositions, formative predispositions that are emptiness, void formative predispositions, formative predispositions that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent consciousness, consciousness that is emptiness, void consciousness, and consciousness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent consciousness is not one thing, consciousness that is emptiness another, void consciousness another, consciousness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent consciousness, consciousness that is emptiness, void consciousness, consciousness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the eyes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the eyes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the eyes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the eyes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the eyes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the eyes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the eyes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the eyes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the eyes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the eyes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the eyes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the eyes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent eyes, eyes that are emptiness, void eyes, and eyes that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent eyes are not one thing, eyes that are emptiness another, void eyes another, eyes that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent eyes, eyes that are emptiness, void eyes, eyes that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the ears are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the ears are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the ears are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the ears are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the ears are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the ears are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the ears are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the ears are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the ears are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the ears are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the ears are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the ears are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent ears, ears that are emptiness, void ears, and ears that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent ears are not one thing, ears that are emptiness another, void ears another, ears that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent ears, ears that are emptiness, void ears, ears that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the nose is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the nose is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the nose is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the nose is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the nose is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the nose is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the nose is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the nose is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the nose is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the nose is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the nose is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the nose is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent nose, a nose that is emptiness, a void nose, and a nose that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent nose is not one thing, a nose that is emptiness another, a void nose another, a nose that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent nose, a nose that is emptiness, a void nose, a nose that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the tongue is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the tongue is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the tongue is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the tongue is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the tongue is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the tongue is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the tongue is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the tongue is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the tongue is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the tongue is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the tongue is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the tongue is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent tongue, a tongue that is emptiness, a void tongue, and a tongue that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent tongue is not one thing, a tongue that is emptiness another, a void tongue another, a tongue that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent tongue, a tongue that is emptiness, a void tongue, a tongue that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the body is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the body is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the body is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the body is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the body is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the body is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the body is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the body is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the body is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the body is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the body is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the body is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent body, a body that is emptiness, a void body, and a body that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent body is not one thing, a body that is emptiness another, a void body another, a body that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent body, a body that is emptiness, a void body, a body that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the mental faculty is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the mental faculty is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the mental faculty is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the mental faculty is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the mental faculty is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the mental faculty is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the mental faculty is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the mental faculty is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the mental faculty is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the mental faculty is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the mental faculty is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the mental faculty is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent mental faculty, a mental faculty that is emptiness, a void mental faculty, and a mental faculty that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent mental faculty is not one thing, a mental faculty that is emptiness another, a void mental faculty another, a mental faculty that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent mental faculty, a mental faculty that is emptiness, a void mental faculty, a mental faculty that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because sights are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because sights are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because sights are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because sights are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because sights are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because sights are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because sights are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because sights are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because sights are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because sights are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because sights are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because sights are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent sights, sights that are emptiness, void sights, and sights that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent sights are not one thing, sights that are emptiness another, void sights another, sights that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent sights, sights that are emptiness, void sights, sights that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because sounds are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because sounds are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because sounds are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because sounds are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because sounds are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because sounds are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because sounds are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because sounds are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because sounds are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because sounds are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because sounds are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because sounds are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent sounds, sounds that are emptiness, void sounds, and sounds that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent sounds are not one thing, sounds that are emptiness another, void sounds another, sounds that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent sounds, sounds that are emptiness, void sounds, sounds that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because odors are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because odors are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because odors are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because odors are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because odors are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because odors are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because odors are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because odors are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because odors are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because odors are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because odors are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because odors are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent odors, odors that are emptiness, void odors, and odors that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent odors are not one thing, odors that are emptiness another, void odors another, odors that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent odors, odors that are emptiness, void odors, odors that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because tastes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because tastes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because tastes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because tastes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because tastes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because tastes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because tastes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because tastes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because tastes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because tastes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because tastes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because tastes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent tastes, tastes that are emptiness, void tastes, and tastes that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent tastes are not one thing, tastes that are emptiness another, void tastes another, tastes that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent tastes, tastes that are emptiness, void tastes, tastes that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because tangibles are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because tangibles are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because tangibles are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because tangibles are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because tangibles are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because tangibles are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because tangibles are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because tangibles are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because tangibles are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because tangibles are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because tangibles are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because tangibles are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent tangibles, tangibles that are emptiness, void tangibles, and tangibles that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent tangibles are not one thing, tangibles that are emptiness another, void tangibles another, tangibles that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent tangibles, tangibles that are emptiness, void tangibles, tangibles that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because mental phenomena are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because mental phenomena are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because mental phenomena are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because mental phenomena are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because mental phenomena are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because mental phenomena are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because mental phenomena are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because mental phenomena are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because mental phenomena are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because mental phenomena are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because mental phenomena are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because mental phenomena are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent mental phenomena, mental phenomena that are emptiness, void mental phenomena, and mental phenomena that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent mental phenomena are not one thing, mental phenomena that are emptiness another, void mental phenomena another, mental phenomena that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent mental phenomena, mental phenomena that are emptiness, void mental phenomena, mental phenomena that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because visual consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because visual consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because visual consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because visual consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because visual consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because visual consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because visual consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because visual consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because visual consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because visual consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because visual consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because visual consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent visual consciousness, a visual consciousness that is emptiness, a void visual consciousness, and a visual consciousness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent visual consciousness is not one thing, a visual consciousness that is emptiness another, a void visual consciousness another, a visual consciousness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent visual consciousness, a visual consciousness that is emptiness, a void visual consciousness, a visual consciousness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because auditory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because auditory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because auditory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because auditory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because auditory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because auditory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because auditory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because auditory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because auditory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because auditory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because auditory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because auditory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent auditory consciousness, an auditory consciousness that is emptiness, a void auditory consciousness, and an auditory consciousness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent auditory consciousness is not one thing, an auditory consciousness that is emptiness another, a void auditory consciousness another, an auditory consciousness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent auditory consciousness, an auditory consciousness that is emptiness, a void auditory consciousness, an auditory consciousness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because olfactory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because olfactory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because olfactory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because olfactory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because olfactory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because olfactory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because olfactory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because olfactory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because olfactory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because olfactory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because olfactory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because olfactory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent olfactory consciousness, an olfactory consciousness that is emptiness, a void olfactory consciousness, and an olfactory consciousness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent olfactory consciousness is not one thing, an olfactory consciousness that is emptiness another, a void olfactory consciousness another, an olfactory consciousness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent olfactory consciousness, an olfactory consciousness that is emptiness, a void olfactory consciousness, an olfactory consciousness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because gustatory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because gustatory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because gustatory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because gustatory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because gustatory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because gustatory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because gustatory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because gustatory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because gustatory consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because gustatory consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because gustatory consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because gustatory consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent gustatory consciousness, a gustatory consciousness that is emptiness, a void gustatory consciousness, and a gustatory consciousness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent gustatory consciousness is not one thing, a gustatory consciousness that is emptiness another, a void gustatory consciousness another, a gustatory consciousness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent gustatory consciousness, a gustatory consciousness that is emptiness, a void gustatory consciousness, a gustatory consciousness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because tactile consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because tactile consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because tactile consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because tactile consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because tactile consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because tactile consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because tactile consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because tactile consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because tactile consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because tactile consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because tactile consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because tactile consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent tactile consciousness, a tactile consciousness that is emptiness, a void tactile consciousness, and a tactile consciousness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent tactile consciousness is not one thing, a tactile consciousness that is emptiness another, a void tactile consciousness another, a tactile consciousness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent tactile consciousness, a tactile consciousness that is emptiness, a void tactile consciousness, a tactile consciousness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle —all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because mental consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because mental consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because mental consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because mental consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because mental consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because mental consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because mental consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because mental consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because mental consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because mental consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because mental consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because mental consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent mental consciousness, a mental consciousness that is emptiness, a void mental consciousness, and a mental consciousness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent mental consciousness is not one thing, a mental consciousness that is emptiness another, a void mental consciousness another, a mental consciousness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent mental consciousness, a mental consciousness that is emptiness, a void mental consciousness, a mental consciousness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because visually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because visually compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because visually compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because visually compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because visually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because visually compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because visually compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because visually compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because visually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because visually compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because visually compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because visually compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent visually compounded sensory contact, visually compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void visually compounded sensory contact, and visually compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent visually compounded sensory contact is not one thing, visually compounded sensory contact that is emptiness another, void visually compounded sensory contact another, visually compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent visually compounded sensory contact, visually compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void visually compounded sensory contact, visually compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because aurally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because aurally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because aurally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because aurally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because aurally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because aurally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because aurally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because aurally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because aurally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because aurally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because aurally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because aurally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent aurally compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void aurally compounded sensory contact, and aurally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent aurally compounded sensory contact is not one thing, aurally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness another, void aurally compounded sensory contact another, aurally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent aurally compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void aurally compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because nasally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because nasally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because nasally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because nasally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because nasally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future; because nasally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future; because nasally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future; and because nasally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because nasally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle; because nasally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle; because nasally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because nasally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent nasally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void nasally compounded sensory contact, and nasally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent nasally compounded sensory contact is not one thing, nasally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness another, void nasally compounded sensory contact another, nasally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent nasally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void nasally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because lingually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because lingually compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because lingually compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because lingually compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because lingually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because lingually compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because lingually compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because lingually compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because lingually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because lingually compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because lingually compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle; and because lingually compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent lingually compounded sensory contact, lingually compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void lingually compounded sensory contact, and lingually compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent lingually compounded sensory contact is not one thing, lingually compounded sensory contact that is emptiness another, void lingually compounded sensory contact another, lingually compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent lingually compounded sensory contact, lingually compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void lingually compounded sensory contact, lingually compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because corporeally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future; and because corporeally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because corporeally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent corporeally compounded sensory contact, corporeally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void corporeally compounded sensory contact, and corporeally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent corporeally compounded sensory contact is not one thing, corporeally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness another, void corporeally compounded sensory contact another, corporeally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent corporeally compounded sensory contact, corporeally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void corporeally compounded sensory contact, corporeally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because mentally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because mentally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because mentally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because mentally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because mentally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because mentally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because mentally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because mentally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because mentally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because mentally compounded sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because mentally compounded sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because mentally compounded sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent mentally compounded sensory contact, mentally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void mentally compounded sensory contact, and mentally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent mentally compounded sensory contact is not one thing, mentally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness another, void mentally compounded sensory contact another, mentally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent mentally compounded sensory contact, mentally compounded sensory contact that is emptiness, void mentally compounded sensory contact, mentally compounded sensory contact that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are not one thing, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact that are emptiness another, void feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact another, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are not one thing, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness another, void feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact another, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are not one thing, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness another, void feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact another, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are not one thing, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact that are emptiness another, void feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact another, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are not one thing, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness another, void feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact another, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are not one thing, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness another, void feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact another, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact that are emptiness, void feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the earth element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the earth element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the earth element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the earth element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the earth element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the earth element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the earth element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the earth element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the earth element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the earth element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the earth element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the earth element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent earth element, an earth element that is emptiness, a void earth element, and an earth element that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent earth element is not one thing, an earth element that is emptiness another, a void earth element another, an earth element that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent earth element, an earth element that is emptiness, a void earth element, an earth element that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the water element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the water element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the water element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the water element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the water element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the water element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the water element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the water element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the water element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the water element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the water element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the water element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent water element, a water element that is emptiness, a void water element, and a water element that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent water element is not one thing, a water element that is emptiness another, a void water element another, a water element that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent water element, a water element that is emptiness, a void water element, a water element that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the fire element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the fire element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the fire element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the fire element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the fire element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the fire element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the fire element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the fire element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the fire element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the fire element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the fire element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the fire element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent fire element, a fire element that is emptiness, a void fire element, and a fire element that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent fire element is not one thing, a fire element that is emptiness another, a void fire element another, a fire element that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent fire element, a fire element that is emptiness, a void fire element, a fire element that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the wind element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the wind element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the wind element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the wind element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the wind element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the wind element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the wind element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the wind element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the wind element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the wind element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the wind element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the wind element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent wind element, a wind element that is emptiness, a void wind element, and a wind element that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent wind element is not one thing, a wind element that is emptiness another, a void wind element another, a wind element that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent wind element, a wind element that is emptiness, a void wind element, a wind element that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the space element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the space element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the space element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the space element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the space element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the space element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the space element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the space element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the space element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the space element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the space element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the space element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent space element, a space element that is emptiness, a void space element, and a space element that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent space element is not one thing, a space element that is emptiness another, a void space element another, a space element that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent space element, a space element that is emptiness, a void space element, a space element that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the consciousness element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the consciousness element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the consciousness element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the consciousness element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the consciousness element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the consciousness element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the consciousness element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the consciousness element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the consciousness element is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the consciousness element is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the consciousness element is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the consciousness element is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent consciousness element, a consciousness element that is emptiness, a void consciousness element, and a consciousness element that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent consciousness element is not one thing, a consciousness element that is emptiness another, a void consciousness element another, a consciousness element that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent consciousness element, a consciousness element that is emptiness, a void consciousness element, a consciousness element that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because ignorance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because ignorance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because ignorance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because ignorance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because ignorance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because ignorance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because ignorance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because ignorance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because ignorance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because ignorance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because ignorance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because ignorance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent ignorance, an ignorance that is emptiness, a void ignorance, and an ignorance that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent ignorance is not one thing, an ignorance that is emptiness another, a void ignorance another, an ignorance that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent ignorance, an ignorance that is emptiness, a void ignorance, an ignorance that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because formative predispositions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because formative predispositions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because formative predispositions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because formative predispositions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because formative predispositions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because formative predispositions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because formative predispositions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because formative predispositions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because formative predispositions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because formative predispositions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because formative predispositions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because formative predispositions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent formative predispositions, formative predispositions that are emptiness, void formative predispositions, and formative predispositions that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent formative predispositions are not one thing, formative predispositions that are emptiness another, void formative predispositions another, formative predispositions that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent formative predispositions, formative predispositions that are emptiness, void formative predispositions, formative predispositions that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because consciousness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because consciousness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because consciousness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because consciousness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent consciousness, a consciousness that is emptiness, a void consciousness, and a consciousness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent consciousness is not one thing, a consciousness that is emptiness another, a void consciousness another, a consciousness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent consciousness, a consciousness that is emptiness, a void consciousness, a consciousness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because name and form are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because name and form are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because name and form are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because name and form are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because name and form are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because name and form are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because name and form are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because name and form are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because name and form are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because name and form are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because name and form are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because name and form are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent name and form, name and form that are emptiness, void name and form, and name and form that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent name and form are not one thing, name and form that are emptiness another, void name and form another, name and form that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent name and form, name and form that are emptiness, void name and form, name and form that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the six sense fields are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the six sense fields are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the six sense fields are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the six sense fields are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the six sense fields are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the six sense fields are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the six sense fields are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the six sense fields are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the six sense fields are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the six sense fields are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the six sense fields are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the six sense fields are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent six sense fields, the six sense fields that are emptiness, the void six sense fields, and the six sense fields that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent six sense fields are not one thing, the six sense fields that are emptiness another, the void six sense fields another, the six sense fields that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent six sense fields, the six sense fields that are emptiness, the void six sense fields, the six sense fields that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because sensory contact is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because sensory contact is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because sensory contact is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because sensory contact is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent sensory contact, a sensory contact that is emptiness, a void sensory contact, and a sensory contact that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent sensory contact is not one thing, a sensory contact that is emptiness another, a void sensory contact another, a sensory contact that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent sensory contact, a sensory contact that is emptiness, a void sensory contact, a sensory contact that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because sensation is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because sensation is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because sensation is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because sensation is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because sensation is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because sensation is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because sensation is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because sensation is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because sensation is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because sensation is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because sensation is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because sensation is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent sensation, a sensation that is emptiness, a void sensation, and a sensation that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent sensation is not one thing, a sensation that is emptiness another, a void sensation another, a sensation that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent sensation, a sensation that is emptiness, a void sensation, a sensation that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because craving is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because craving is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because craving is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because craving is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because craving is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because craving is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because craving is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because craving is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because craving is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because craving is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because craving is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because craving is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent craving, a craving that is emptiness, a void craving, and a craving that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent craving is not one thing, a craving that is emptiness another, a void craving another, a craving that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent craving, a craving that is emptiness, a void craving, a craving that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because grasping is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because grasping is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because grasping is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because grasping is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because grasping is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because grasping is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because grasping is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because grasping is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because grasping is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because grasping is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because grasping is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because grasping is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent grasping, a grasping that is emptiness, a void grasping, and a grasping that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent grasping is not one thing, a grasping that is emptiness another, a void grasping another, a grasping that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent grasping, a grasping that is emptiness, a void grasping, a grasping that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the rebirth process is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the rebirth process is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the rebirth process is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the rebirth process is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the rebirth process is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the rebirth process is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the rebirth process is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the rebirth process is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the rebirth process is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the rebirth process is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the rebirth process is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the rebirth process is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent rebirth process, a rebirth process that is emptiness, a void rebirth process, and a rebirth process that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent rebirth process is not one thing, a rebirth process that is emptiness another, a void rebirth process another, a rebirth process that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent rebirth process, a rebirth process that is emptiness, a void rebirth process, a rebirth process that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because birth is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because birth is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because birth is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because birth is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because birth is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because birth is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because birth is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because birth is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because birth is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because birth is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because birth is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because birth is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent birth, a birth that is emptiness, a void birth, and a birth that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent birth is not one thing, a birth that is emptiness another, a void birth another, a birth that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent birth, a birth that is emptiness, a void birth, a birth that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because aging and death are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because aging and death are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because aging and death are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because aging and death are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because aging and death are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because aging and death are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because aging and death are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because aging and death are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because aging and death are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because aging and death are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because aging and death are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because aging and death are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent aging and death, aging and death that are emptiness, void aging and death, and aging and death that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent aging and death are not one thing, aging and death that are emptiness another, void aging and death another, aging and death that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent aging and death, aging and death that are emptiness, void aging and death, aging and death that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the perfection of generosity is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of generosity is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of generosity is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the perfection of generosity is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the perfection of generosity is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of generosity is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of generosity is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the perfection of generosity is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the perfection of generosity is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of generosity is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of generosity is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the perfection of generosity is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent perfection of generosity, a perfection of generosity that is emptiness, a void perfection of generosity, and a perfection of generosity that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent perfection of generosity is not one thing, a perfection of generosity that is emptiness another, a void perfection of generosity another, a perfection of generosity that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent perfection of generosity, a perfection of generosity that is emptiness, a void perfection of generosity, a perfection of generosity that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the perfection of ethical discipline is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of ethical discipline is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of ethical discipline is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the perfection of ethical discipline is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the perfection of ethical discipline is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of ethical discipline is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of ethical discipline is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the perfection of ethical discipline is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the perfection of ethical discipline is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of ethical discipline is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of ethical discipline is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the perfection of ethical discipline is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent perfection of ethical discipline, a perfection of ethical discipline that is emptiness, a void perfection of ethical discipline, and a perfection of ethical discipline that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent perfection of ethical discipline is not one thing, a perfection of ethical discipline that is emptiness another, a void perfection of ethical discipline another, a perfection of ethical discipline that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent perfection of ethical discipline, a perfection of ethical discipline that is emptiness, a void perfection of ethical discipline, a perfection of ethical discipline that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the perfection of tolerance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of tolerance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of tolerance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the perfection of tolerance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the perfection of tolerance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of tolerance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of tolerance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the perfection of tolerance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the perfection of tolerance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of tolerance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of tolerance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the perfection of tolerance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent perfection of tolerance, a perfection of tolerance that is emptiness, a void perfection of tolerance, and a perfection of tolerance that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent perfection of tolerance is not one thing, a perfection of tolerance that is emptiness another, a void perfection of tolerance another, a perfection of tolerance that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent perfection of tolerance, a perfection of tolerance that is emptiness, a void perfection of tolerance, a perfection of tolerance that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the perfection of perseverance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of perseverance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of perseverance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the perfection of perseverance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the perfection of perseverance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of perseverance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of perseverance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the perfection of perseverance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the perfection of perseverance is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of perseverance is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of perseverance is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the perfection of perseverance is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent perfection of perseverance, a perfection of perseverance that is emptiness, a void perfection of perseverance, and a perfection of perseverance that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent perfection of perseverance is not one thing, a perfection of perseverance that is emptiness another, a void perfection of perseverance another, a perfection of perseverance that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent perfection of perseverance, a perfection of perseverance that is emptiness, a void perfection of perseverance, a perfection of perseverance that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the perfection of meditative concentration is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of meditative concentration is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of meditative concentration is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the perfection of meditative concentration is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the perfection of meditative concentration is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of meditative concentration is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of meditative concentration is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the perfection of meditative concentration is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the perfection of meditative concentration is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of meditative concentration is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of meditative concentration is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the perfection of meditative concentration is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent perfection of meditative concentration, a perfection of meditative concentration that is emptiness, a void perfection of meditative concentration, and a perfection of meditative concentration that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent perfection of meditative concentration is not one thing, a perfection of meditative concentration that is emptiness another, a void perfection of meditative concentration another, a perfection of meditative concentration that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent perfection of meditative concentration, a perfection of meditative concentration that is emptiness, a void perfection of meditative concentration, a perfection of meditative concentration that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of wisdom is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the perfection of wisdom is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the perfection of wisdom is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of wisdom is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the perfection of wisdom is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the perfection of wisdom is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of wisdom is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the perfection of wisdom is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the perfection of wisdom is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent perfection of wisdom, a perfection of wisdom that is emptiness, a void perfection of wisdom, and a perfection of wisdom that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent perfection of wisdom is not one thing, a perfection of wisdom that is emptiness another, a void perfection of wisdom another, a perfection of wisdom that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent perfection of wisdom, a perfection of wisdom that is emptiness, a void perfection of wisdom, a perfection of wisdom that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of internal phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of internal phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of internal phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of internal phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of internal phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of internal phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of internal phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of internal phenomena, and the emptiness of internal phenomena that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of internal phenomena is not one thing, the emptiness of internal phenomena that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of internal phenomena another, the emptiness of internal phenomena that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of internal phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of internal phenomena that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of external phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of external phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of external phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of external phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of external phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of external phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of external phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of external phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of external phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of external phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of external phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of external phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of external phenomena, and the emptiness of external phenomena that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of external phenomena is not one thing, the emptiness of external phenomena that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of external phenomena another, the emptiness of external phenomena that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of external and internal phenomena, and the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not one thing, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of external and internal phenomena another, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of emptiness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of emptiness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of emptiness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of emptiness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of emptiness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of emptiness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of emptiness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of emptiness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of emptiness is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of emptiness is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of emptiness is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of emptiness is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness that is emptiness, the void emptiness of emptiness, and the emptiness of emptiness that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of emptiness is not one thing, the emptiness of emptiness that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of emptiness another, the emptiness of emptiness that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness that is emptiness, the void emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of great extent is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of great extent is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of great extent is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of great extent is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of great extent is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of great extent is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of great extent is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of great extent is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of great extent is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of great extent is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of great extent is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of great extent is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of great extent that is emptiness, the void emptiness of great extent, and the emptiness of great extent that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of great extent is not one thing, the emptiness of great extent that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of great extent another, the emptiness of great extent that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of great extent that is emptiness, the void emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of great extent that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of ultimate reality is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of ultimate reality is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of ultimate reality is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of ultimate reality that is emptiness, the void emptiness of ultimate reality, and the emptiness of ultimate reality that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of ultimate reality is not one thing, the emptiness of ultimate reality that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of ultimate reality another, the emptiness of ultimate reality that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of ultimate reality that is emptiness, the void emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of ultimate reality that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of conditioned phenomena, and the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not one thing, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of conditioned phenomena another, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, and the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not one thing, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of unconditioned phenomena another, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of the unlimited is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of the unlimited is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of the unlimited is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of the unlimited is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of the unlimited is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of the unlimited is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of the unlimited is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of the unlimited is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of the unlimited is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of the unlimited is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of the unlimited is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of the unlimited is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of the unlimited that is emptiness, the void emptiness of the unlimited, and the emptiness of the unlimited that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of the unlimited is not one thing, the emptiness of the unlimited that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of the unlimited another, the emptiness of the unlimited that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of the unlimited that is emptiness, the void emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of the unlimited that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that is emptiness, the void emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not one thing, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end another, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that is emptiness, the void emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of nonexclusion is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of nonexclusion is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of nonexclusion is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of nonexclusion that is emptiness, the void emptiness of nonexclusion, and the emptiness of nonexclusion that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of nonexclusion is not one thing, the emptiness of nonexclusion that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of nonexclusion another, the emptiness of nonexclusion that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of nonexclusion that is emptiness, the void emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of nonexclusion that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of inherent nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of inherent nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of inherent nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of inherent nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of inherent nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of inherent nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of inherent nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of inherent nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of inherent nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of inherent nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of inherent nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of inherent nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of inherent nature that is emptiness, the void emptiness of inherent nature, and the emptiness of inherent nature that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of inherent nature is not one thing, the emptiness of inherent nature that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of inherent nature another, the emptiness of inherent nature that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of an inherent nature that is emptiness, the void emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of inherent nature that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of all phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of all phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of all phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of all phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of all phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of all phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of all phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of all phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of all phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of all phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of all phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of all phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of all phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of all phenomena, and the emptiness of all phenomena that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of all phenomena is not one thing, the emptiness of all phenomena that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of all phenomena another, the emptiness of all phenomena that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of all phenomena that is emptiness, the void emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of all phenomena that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that is emptiness, the void emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, and the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not one thing, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics another, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that is emptiness, the void emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that is emptiness, the void emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, and the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not one thing, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended another, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that is emptiness, the void emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of nonentities is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of nonentities is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of nonentities is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of nonentities is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of nonentities is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of nonentities is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of nonentities is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of nonentities is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of nonentities is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of nonentities is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of nonentities is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of nonentities is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of nonentities, the emptiness of nonentities that is emptiness, the void emptiness of nonentities, and the emptiness of nonentities that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of nonentities is not one thing, the emptiness of nonentities that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of nonentities another, the emptiness of nonentities that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of nonentities, the emptiness of nonentities that is emptiness, the void emptiness of nonentities, the emptiness of nonentities that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of essential nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of essential nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of essential nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of essential nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of essential nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of essential nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of essential nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of essential nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of essential nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of essential nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of essential nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of essential nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of essential nature, the emptiness of essential nature that is emptiness, the void emptiness of essential nature, and the emptiness of essential nature that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of essential nature is not one thing, the emptiness of essential nature that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of essential nature another, the emptiness of essential nature that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of essential nature, the emptiness of essential nature that is emptiness, the void emptiness of essential nature, the emptiness of essential nature that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that is emptiness, the void emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not one thing, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that is emptiness another, the void emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities another, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that is emptiness, the void emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the applications of mindfulness are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the applications of mindfulness are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the applications of mindfulness are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the applications of mindfulness are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the applications of mindfulness are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the applications of mindfulness are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the applications of mindfulness are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the applications of mindfulness are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the applications of mindfulness are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent applications of mindfulness, applications of mindfulness that are emptiness, void applications of mindfulness, and applications of mindfulness that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent applications of mindfulness are not one thing, applications of mindfulness that are emptiness another, void applications of mindfulness another, applications of mindfulness that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent applications of mindfulness, applications of mindfulness that are emptiness, void applications of mindfulness, applications of mindfulness that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the correct exertions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the correct exertions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the correct exertions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the correct exertions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the correct exertions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the correct exertions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the correct exertions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the correct exertions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the correct exertions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the correct exertions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the correct exertions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the correct exertions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent correct exertions, correct exertions that are emptiness, void correct exertions, and correct exertions that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent correct exertions are not one thing, correct exertions that are emptiness another, void correct exertions another, correct exertions that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent correct exertions, correct exertions that are emptiness, void correct exertions, correct exertions that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the supports for miraculous ability are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the supports for miraculous ability are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the supports for miraculous ability are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the supports for miraculous ability are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the supports for miraculous ability are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the supports for miraculous ability are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the supports for miraculous ability are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the supports for miraculous ability are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the supports for miraculous ability are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the supports for miraculous ability are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the supports for miraculous ability are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the supports for miraculous ability are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent supports for miraculous ability, supports for miraculous ability that are emptiness, void supports for miraculous ability, and supports for miraculous ability that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent supports for miraculous ability are not one thing, supports for miraculous ability that are emptiness another, void supports for miraculous ability another, supports for miraculous ability that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent supports for miraculous ability, supports for miraculous ability that are emptiness, void supports for miraculous ability, supports for miraculous ability that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the faculties are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the faculties are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the faculties are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the faculties are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the faculties are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the faculties are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the faculties are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the faculties are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the faculties are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the faculties are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the faculties are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the faculties are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent faculties, faculties that are emptiness, void faculties, and faculties that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent faculties are not one thing, faculties that are emptiness another, void faculties another, faculties that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent faculties, faculties that are emptiness, void faculties, faculties that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the powers are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the powers are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the powers are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the powers are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the powers are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the powers are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the powers are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the powers are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the powers are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the powers are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the powers are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the powers are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent powers, powers that are emptiness, void powers, and powers that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent powers are not one thing, powers that are emptiness another, void powers another, powers that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent powers, powers that are emptiness, void powers, powers that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the branches of enlightenment are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the branches of enlightenment are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the branches of enlightenment are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the branches of enlightenment are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the branches of enlightenment are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the branches of enlightenment are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the branches of enlightenment are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the branches of enlightenment are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the branches of enlightenment are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the branches of enlightenment are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the branches of enlightenment are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the branches of enlightenment are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent branches of enlightenment, branches of enlightenment that are emptiness, void branches of enlightenment, and branches of enlightenment that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent branches of enlightenment are not one thing, branches of enlightenment that are emptiness another, void branches of enlightenment another, branches of enlightenment that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent branches of enlightenment, branches of enlightenment that are emptiness, void branches of enlightenment, branches of enlightenment that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the noble eightfold path is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the noble eightfold path is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the noble eightfold path is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the noble eightfold path is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the noble eightfold path is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the noble eightfold path is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the noble eightfold path is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the noble eightfold path is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the noble eightfold path is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the noble eightfold path is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the noble eightfold path is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the noble eightfold path is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent noble eightfold path, the noble eightfold path that is emptiness, the void noble eightfold path, and the noble eightfold path that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent noble eightfold path is not one thing, the noble eightfold path that is emptiness another, the void noble eightfold path another, the noble eightfold path that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent noble eightfold path, the noble eightfold path that is emptiness, the void noble eightfold path, the noble eightfold path that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the truths of the noble ones are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the truths of the noble ones are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the truths of the noble ones are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the truths of the noble ones are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the truths of the noble ones are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the truths of the noble ones are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the truths of the noble ones are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the truths of the noble ones are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the truths of the noble ones are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the truths of the noble ones are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the truths of the noble ones are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the truths of the noble ones are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent truths of the noble ones, truths of the noble ones that are emptiness, void truths of the noble ones, and truths of the noble ones that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent truths of the noble ones are not one thing, truths of the noble ones that are emptiness another, void truths of the noble ones another, truths of the noble ones that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent truths of the noble ones, truths of the noble ones that are emptiness, void truths of the noble ones, truths of the noble ones that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the meditative concentrations are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the meditative concentrations are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the meditative concentrations are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the meditative concentrations are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the meditative concentrations are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the meditative concentrations are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the meditative concentrations are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the meditative concentrations are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the meditative concentrations are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the meditative concentrations are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the meditative concentrations are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the meditative concentrations are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent meditative concentrations, meditative concentrations that are emptiness, void meditative concentrations, and meditative concentrations that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent meditative concentrations are not one thing, meditative concentrations that are emptiness another, void meditative concentrations another, meditative concentrations that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent meditative concentrations, meditative concentrations that are emptiness, void meditative concentrations, meditative concentrations that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the immeasurable attitudes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the immeasurable attitudes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the immeasurable attitudes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the immeasurable attitudes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the immeasurable attitudes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the immeasurable attitudes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the immeasurable attitudes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the immeasurable attitudes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the immeasurable attitudes are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the immeasurable attitudes are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the immeasurable attitudes are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the immeasurable attitudes are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent immeasurable attitudes, immeasurable attitudes that are emptiness, void immeasurable attitudes, and immeasurable attitudes that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent immeasurable attitudes are not one thing, immeasurable attitudes that are emptiness another, void immeasurable attitudes another, immeasurable attitudes that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent immeasurable attitudes, immeasurable attitudes that are emptiness, void immeasurable attitudes, immeasurable attitudes that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the formless absorptions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the formless absorptions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the formless absorptions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the formless absorptions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the formless absorptions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the formless absorptions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the formless absorptions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the formless absorptions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the formless absorptions are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the formless absorptions are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the formless absorptions are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the formless absorptions are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent formless absorptions, formless absorptions that are emptiness, void formless absorptions, and formless absorptions that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent formless absorptions are not one thing, formless absorptions that are emptiness another, void formless absorptions another, formless absorptions that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent formless absorptions, formless absorptions that are emptiness, void formless absorptions, formless absorptions that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the liberations are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the liberations are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the liberations are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the liberations are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the liberations are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the liberations are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the liberations are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the liberations are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the liberations are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the liberations are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the liberations are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the liberations are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent liberations, liberations that are emptiness, void liberations, and liberations that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent liberations are not one thing, liberations that are emptiness another, void liberations another, liberations that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent liberations, liberations that are emptiness, void liberations, liberations that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the serial steps of meditative absorption are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the serial steps of meditative absorption are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the serial steps of meditative absorption are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent serial steps of meditative absorption, serial steps of meditative absorption that are emptiness, void serial steps of meditative absorption, and serial steps of meditative absorption that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent serial steps of meditative absorption are not one thing, serial steps of meditative absorption that are emptiness another, void serial steps of meditative absorption another, serial steps of meditative absorption that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent serial steps of meditative absorption, serial steps of meditative absorption that are emptiness, void serial steps of meditative absorption, serial steps of meditative absorption that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past; because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past; because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past; and because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future; because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future; because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future; and because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle; because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle; because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle; and because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation; emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that are emptiness; void emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation; and emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are not one thing; emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that are emptiness another; void emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation another; emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that are without essential nature another; and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation; emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that are emptiness; void emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation; emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that are without essential nature; bodhisattvas; the limit of the past; the limit of the future; and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the extrasensory powers are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the extrasensory powers are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the extrasensory powers are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the extrasensory powers are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the extrasensory powers are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the extrasensory powers are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the extrasensory powers are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the extrasensory powers are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the extrasensory powers are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the extrasensory powers are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the extrasensory powers are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the extrasensory powers are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent extrasensory powers, extrasensory powers that are emptiness, void extrasensory powers, and extrasensory powers that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent extrasensory powers are not one thing, extrasensory powers that are emptiness another, void extrasensory powers another, extrasensory powers that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent extrasensory powers, extrasensory powers that are emptiness, void extrasensory powers, extrasensory powers that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the meditative stabilities are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the meditative stabilities are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the meditative stabilities are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the meditative stabilities are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the meditative stabilities are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the meditative stabilities are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the meditative stabilities are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the meditative stabilities are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the meditative stabilities are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the meditative stabilities are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the meditative stabilities are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the meditative stabilities are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent meditative stabilities, meditative stabilities that are emptiness, void meditative stabilities, and meditative stabilities that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent meditative stabilities are not one thing, meditative stabilities that are emptiness another, void meditative stabilities another, meditative stabilities that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent meditative stabilities, meditative stabilities that are emptiness, void meditative stabilities, meditative stabilities that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the dhāraṇī gateways are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the dhāraṇī gateways are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the dhāraṇī gateways are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the dhāraṇī gateways are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the dhāraṇī gateways are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the dhāraṇī gateways are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the dhāraṇī gateways are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the dhāraṇī gateways are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the dhāraṇī gateways are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the dhāraṇī gateways are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the dhāraṇī gateways are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the dhāraṇī gateways are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent dhāraṇī gateways, dhāraṇī gateways that are emptiness, void dhāraṇī gateways, and dhāraṇī gateways that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent dhāraṇī gateways are not one thing, dhāraṇī gateways that are emptiness another, void dhāraṇī gateways another, dhāraṇī gateways that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent dhāraṇī gateways, dhāraṇī gateways that are emptiness, void dhāraṇī gateways, dhāraṇī gateways that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the powers of the tathāgatas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the powers of the tathāgatas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the powers of the tathāgatas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the powers of the tathāgatas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the powers of the tathāgatas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the powers of the tathāgatas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the powers of the tathāgatas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the powers of the tathāgatas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the powers of the tathāgatas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the powers of the tathāgatas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the powers of the tathāgatas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the powers of the tathāgatas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent powers of the tathāgatas, powers of the tathāgatas that are emptiness, void powers of the tathāgatas, and powers of the tathāgatas that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent powers of the tathāgatas are not one thing, powers of the tathāgatas that are emptiness another, void powers of the tathāgatas another, powers of the tathāgatas that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent powers of the tathāgatas, powers of the tathāgatas that are emptiness, void powers of the tathāgatas, powers of the tathāgatas that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the fearlessnesses are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the fearlessnesses are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the fearlessnesses are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the fearlessnesses are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the fearlessnesses are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the fearlessnesses are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the fearlessnesses are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the fearlessnesses are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the fearlessnesses are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the fearlessnesses are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the fearlessnesses are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the fearlessnesses are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent fearlessnesses, fearlessnesses that are emptiness, void fearlessnesses, and fearlessnesses that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent fearlessnesses are not one thing, fearlessnesses that are emptiness another, void fearlessnesses another, fearlessnesses that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent fearlessnesses, fearlessnesses that are emptiness, void fearlessnesses, fearlessnesses that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the kinds of exact knowledge are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the kinds of exact knowledge are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the kinds of exact knowledge are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the kinds of exact knowledge are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the kinds of exact knowledge are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the kinds of exact knowledge are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the kinds of exact knowledge are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the kinds of exact knowledge are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the kinds of exact knowledge are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the kinds of exact knowledge are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the kinds of exact knowledge are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the kinds of exact knowledge are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in kinds of exact knowledge that are nonexistent, kinds of exact knowledge that are emptiness, kinds of exact knowledge that are void, and kinds of exact knowledge that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Kinds of exact knowledge that are nonexistent are not one thing, kinds of exact knowledge that are emptiness another, kinds of exact knowledge that are void another, kinds of exact knowledge that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, kinds of exact knowledge that are nonexistent, kinds of exact knowledge that are emptiness, kinds of exact knowledge that are void, kinds of exact knowledge that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because great compassion is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because great compassion is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because great compassion is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because great compassion is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because great compassion is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because great compassion is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because great compassion is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because great compassion is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because great compassion is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because great compassion is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because great compassion is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because great compassion is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in a nonexistent great compassion, a great compassion that is emptiness, a void great compassion, and a great compassion that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. A nonexistent great compassion is not one thing, a great compassion that is emptiness another, a void great compassion another, a great compassion that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, a nonexistent great compassion, a great compassion that is emptiness, a void great compassion, a great compassion that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in distinct qualities of the buddhas that are nonexistent, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are emptiness, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are void, and distinct qualities of the buddhas that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Distinct qualities of the buddhas that are nonexistent are not one thing, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are emptiness another, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are void another, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are nonexistent, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are emptiness, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are void, distinct qualities of the buddhas that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the realm of phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the realm of phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the realm of phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the realm of phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the realm of phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the realm of phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the realm of phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the realm of phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the realm of phenomena is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the realm of phenomena is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the realm of phenomena is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the realm of phenomena is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent realm of phenomena, the realm of phenomena that is emptiness, the void realm of phenomena, and the realm of phenomena that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent realm of phenomena is not one thing, the realm of phenomena that is emptiness another, the void realm of phenomena another, the realm of phenomena that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent realm of phenomena, the realm of phenomena that is emptiness, the void realm of phenomena, the realm of phenomena that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the real nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the real nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the real nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the real nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the real nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the real nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the real nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the real nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the real nature is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the real nature is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the real nature is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the real nature is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent real nature, the real nature that is emptiness, the void real nature, and the real nature that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent real nature is not one thing, the real nature that is emptiness another, the void real nature another, the real nature that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent real nature, the real nature that is emptiness, the void real nature, the real nature that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the very limit of reality is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the very limit of reality is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the very limit of reality is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the very limit of reality is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the very limit of reality is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the very limit of reality is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the very limit of reality is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the very limit of reality is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the very limit of reality is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the very limit of reality is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the very limit of reality is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the very limit of reality is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the very limit of reality that is nonexistent, the very limit of reality that is emptiness, the very limit of reality that is void, and the very limit of reality that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The very limit of reality that is nonexistent is not one thing, the very limit of reality that is emptiness another, the very limit of reality that is void another, the very limit of reality that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the very limit of reality that is nonexistent, the very limit of reality that is emptiness, the very limit of reality that is void, the very limit of reality that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the realm of the inconceivable is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because the realm of the inconceivable is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because the realm of the inconceivable is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the realm of the inconceivable is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because the realm of the inconceivable is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because the realm of the inconceivable is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because the realm of the inconceivable is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the realm of the inconceivable is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because the realm of the inconceivable is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because the realm of the inconceivable is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in the nonexistent realm of the inconceivable, the realm of the inconceivable that is emptiness, the void realm of the inconceivable, and the realm of the inconceivable that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. The nonexistent realm of the inconceivable is not one thing, the realm of the inconceivable that is emptiness another, the void realm of the inconceivable another, the realm of the inconceivable that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nonexistent realm of the inconceivable, the realm of the inconceivable that is emptiness, the void realm of the inconceivable, the realm of the inconceivable that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because śrāvakas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because śrāvakas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because śrāvakas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because śrāvakas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because śrāvakas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because śrāvakas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because śrāvakas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because śrāvakas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because śrāvakas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because śrāvakas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because śrāvakas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because śrāvakas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent śrāvakas, śrāvakas that are emptiness, void śrāvakas, and śrāvakas that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent śrāvakas are not one thing, śrāvakas that are emptiness another, void śrāvakas another, śrāvakas that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent śrāvakas, śrāvakas that are emptiness, void śrāvakas, śrāvakas that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because pratyekabuddhas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because pratyekabuddhas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because pratyekabuddhas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because pratyekabuddhas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because pratyekabuddhas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because pratyekabuddhas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because pratyekabuddhas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because pratyekabuddhas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because pratyekabuddhas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because pratyekabuddhas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because pratyekabuddhas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because pratyekabuddhas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent pratyekabuddhas, pratyekabuddhas that are emptiness, void pratyekabuddhas, and pratyekabuddhas that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent pratyekabuddhas are not one thing, pratyekabuddhas that are emptiness another, void pratyekabuddhas another, pratyekabuddhas that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent pratyekabuddhas, pratyekabuddhas that are emptiness, void pratyekabuddhas, pratyekabuddhas that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because bodhisattvas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because bodhisattvas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because bodhisattvas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because bodhisattvas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because bodhisattvas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because bodhisattvas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because bodhisattvas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because bodhisattvas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because bodhisattvas are nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because bodhisattvas are emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because bodhisattvas are void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because bodhisattvas are without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent bodhisattvas, bodhisattvas that are emptiness, void bodhisattvas, and bodhisattvas that are without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent bodhisattvas are not one thing, bodhisattvas that are emptiness another, void bodhisattvas another, bodhisattvas that are without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent bodhisattvas, bodhisattvas that are emptiness, void bodhisattvas, bodhisattvas that are without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because omniscience is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because omniscience is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, because omniscience is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, and because omniscience is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past. It is because omniscience is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because omniscience is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, because omniscience is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and because omniscience is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future. It is because omniscience is nonexistent that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because omniscience is emptiness that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, because omniscience is void that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle, and because omniscience is without essential nature that bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because in nonexistent omniscience, omniscience that is emptiness, void omniscience, and omniscience that is without essential nature, the limit of the past is not apprehended, the limit of the future is not apprehended, and the middle is not apprehended. Nonexistent omniscience is not one thing, omniscience that is emptiness another, void omniscience another, omniscience that is without essential nature another, and bodhisattvas yet another, or the limit of the past one thing, the limit of the future another, and the middle yet another. So, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nonexistent omniscience, omniscience that is emptiness, void omniscience, omniscience that is without essential nature, bodhisattvas, the limit of the past, the limit of the future, and the middle—all of these—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the past, bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended at the limit of the future, and bodhisattvas cannot be apprehended in the middle. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because physical forms are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, physical forms are the same as space. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because physical forms are emptiness, the past limit of physical forms cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because physical forms are beyond all limits. 
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because feelings are emptiness, the past limit of feelings cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because perceptions are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, perceptions are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because perceptions are emptiness, the past limit of perceptions cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because perceptions are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because formative predispositions are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, formative predispositions are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because formative predispositions are emptiness, the past limit of formative predispositions cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because formative predispositions are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because consciousness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, consciousness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because consciousness is emptiness, the past limit of consciousness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because consciousness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the eyes are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the eyes are emptiness, the past limit of the eyes cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the eyes are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the ears are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the ears are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the ears are emptiness, the past limit of the ears cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the ears are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the nose is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nose is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the nose is emptiness, the past limit of the nose cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the nose is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the tongue is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the tongue is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the tongue is emptiness, the past limit of the tongue cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the tongue is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the body is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the body is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the body is emptiness, the past limit of the body cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the body is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the mental faculty is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the mental faculty is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the mental faculty is emptiness, the past limit of the mental faculty cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the mental faculty is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because sights are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because sights are emptiness, the past limit of sights cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because sights are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because sounds are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sounds are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because sounds are emptiness, the past limit of sounds cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because sounds are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because odors are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, odors are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because odors are emptiness, the past limit of odors cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because odors are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because tastes are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tastes are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because tastes are emptiness, the past limit of tastes cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because tastes are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because tangibles are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tangibles are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because tangibles are emptiness, the past limit of tangibles cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because tangibles are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because mental phenomena are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mental phenomena are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because mental phenomena are emptiness, the past limit of mental phenomena cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because mental phenomena are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because visual consciousness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because visual consciousness is emptiness, the past limit of visual consciousness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because visual consciousness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because auditory consciousness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, auditory consciousness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because auditory consciousness is emptiness, the past limit of auditory consciousness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because auditory consciousness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because olfactory consciousness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, olfactory consciousness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because olfactory consciousness is emptiness, the past limit of olfactory consciousness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because olfactory consciousness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because gustatory consciousness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, gustatory consciousness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because gustatory consciousness is emptiness, the past limit of gustatory consciousness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because gustatory consciousness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because tactile consciousness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tactile consciousness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because tactile consciousness is emptiness, the past limit of tactile consciousness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because tactile consciousness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because mental consciousness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mental consciousness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because mental consciousness is emptiness, the past limit of mental consciousness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because mental consciousness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because visually compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because visually compounded sensory contact is emptiness, the past limit of visually compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because visually compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because aurally compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, aurally compounded sensory contact is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because aurally compounded sensory contact is emptiness, the past limit of aurally compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because aurally compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because nasally compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nasally compounded sensory contact is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because nasally compounded sensory contact is emptiness, the past limit of nasally compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because nasally compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because lingually compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, lingually compounded sensory contact is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because lingually compounded sensory contact is emptiness, the past limit of lingually compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because lingually compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, corporeally compounded sensory contact is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is emptiness, the past limit of corporeally compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because corporeally compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because mentally compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mentally compounded sensory contact is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because mentally compounded sensory contact is emptiness, the past limit of mentally compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because mentally compounded sensory contact is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are emptiness, the past limit of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are emptiness, the past limit of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are emptiness, the past limit of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are emptiness, the past limit of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are emptiness, the past limit of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are emptiness, the past limit of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the earth element is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the earth element is emptiness, the past limit of the earth element cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the earth element is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the water element is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the water element is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the water element is emptiness, the past limit of the water element cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the water element is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the fire element is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fire element is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the fire element is emptiness, the past limit of the fire element cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the fire element is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the wind element is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the wind element is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the wind element is emptiness, the past limit of the wind element cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the wind element is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the space element is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the space element is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the space element is emptiness, the past limit of the space element cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the space element is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the consciousness element is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the consciousness element is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the consciousness element is emptiness, the past limit of the consciousness element cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the consciousness element is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because ignorance is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because ignorance is emptiness, the past limit of ignorance cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because ignorance is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because formative predispositions are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, formative predispositions are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because formative predispositions are emptiness, the past limit of formative predispositions cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because formative predispositions are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because consciousness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, consciousness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because consciousness is emptiness, the past limit of consciousness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because consciousness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because name and form are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, name and form are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because name and form are emptiness, the past limit of name and form cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because name and form are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the six sense fields are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the six sense fields are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the six sense fields are emptiness, the past limit of the six sense fields cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the six sense fields are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because sensory contact is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sensory contact is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because sensory contact is emptiness, the past limit of sensory contact cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because sensory contact is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because sensation is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sensation is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because sensation is emptiness, the past limit of sensation cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because sensation is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because craving is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, craving is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because craving is emptiness, the past limit of craving cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because craving is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because grasping is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, grasping is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because grasping is emptiness, the past limit of grasping cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because grasping is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the rebirth process is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the rebirth process is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the rebirth process is emptiness, the past limit of the rebirth process cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the rebirth process is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because birth is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, birth is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because birth is emptiness, the past limit of birth cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because birth is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because aging and death are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, aging and death are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because aging and death are emptiness, the past limit of aging and death cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because aging and death are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of generosity is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the perfection of generosity is emptiness, the past limit of the perfection of generosity cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of generosity is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of ethical discipline is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of ethical discipline is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because, just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the perfection of ethical discipline is emptiness, the past limit of the perfection of ethical discipline cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of ethical discipline is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of tolerance is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of tolerance is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the perfection of tolerance is emptiness, the past limit of the perfection of tolerance cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of tolerance is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of perseverance is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of perseverance is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the perfection of perseverance is emptiness, the past limit of the perfection of perseverance cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of perseverance is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of meditative concentration is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of meditative concentration is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the perfection of meditative concentration is emptiness, the past limit of the perfection of meditative concentration cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of meditative concentration is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of wisdom is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of wisdom is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the perfection of wisdom is emptiness, the past limit of the perfection of wisdom cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the perfection of wisdom is beyond all limits. 
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of internal phenomena cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of internal phenomena is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of external phenomena is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of external phenomena is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of external phenomena is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of external phenomena cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of external phenomena is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of emptiness is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of emptiness is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of emptiness is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of emptiness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of emptiness is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of great extent is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of great extent is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of great extent is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of great extent cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of great extent is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of ultimate reality is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of ultimate reality cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of ultimate reality is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of the unlimited is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of the unlimited is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of the unlimited is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of the unlimited cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of the unlimited is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of nonexclusion is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of nonexclusion cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of nonexclusion is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of inherent nature is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of inherent nature is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of inherent nature is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of inherent nature cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of inherent nature is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of all phenomena is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of all phenomena is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of all phenomena is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of all phenomena cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of all phenomena is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of nonentities is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of nonentities is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of nonentities is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of nonentities cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of nonentities is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of essential nature is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of essential nature is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of essential nature is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of essential nature cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of essential nature is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the applications of mindfulness are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the applications of mindfulness are emptiness, the past limit of the applications of mindfulness cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the applications of mindfulness are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the correct exertions are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the correct exertions are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the correct exertions are emptiness, the past limit of the correct exertions cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the correct exertions are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the supports for miraculous ability are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the supports for miraculous ability are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the supports for miraculous ability are emptiness, the past limit of the supports for miraculous ability cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the supports for miraculous ability are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the faculties are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the faculties are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the faculties are emptiness, the past limit of the faculties cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the faculties are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the powers are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the powers are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the powers are emptiness, the past limit of the powers cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the powers are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the branches of enlightenment are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the branches of enlightenment are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the branches of enlightenment are emptiness, the past limit of the branches of enlightenment cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the branches of enlightenment are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the noble eightfold path is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the noble eightfold path is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the noble eightfold path is emptiness, the past limit of the noble eightfold path cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the noble eightfold path is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the truths of the noble ones are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because, just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the truths of the noble ones are emptiness, the past limit of the truths of the noble ones cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the truths of the noble ones are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the meditative concentrations are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the meditative concentrations are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the meditative concentrations are emptiness, the past limit of the meditative concentrations cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the meditative concentrations are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the immeasurable attitudes are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the immeasurable attitudes are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the immeasurable attitudes are emptiness, the past limit of the immeasurable attitudes cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the immeasurable attitudes are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the formless absorptions are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the formless absorptions are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the formless absorptions are emptiness, the past limit of the formless absorptions cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the formless absorptions are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the eight liberations are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the liberations are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the liberations are emptiness, the past limit of the liberations cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the liberations are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the serial steps of meditative absorption are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are emptiness, the past limit of the serial steps of meditative absorption cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the serial steps of meditative absorption are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are emptiness, the past limit of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the extrasensory powers are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the extrasensory powers are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the extrasensory powers are emptiness, the past limit of the extrasensory powers cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the extrasensory powers are beyond all limits. 
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the meditative stabilities are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the meditative stabilities are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the meditative stabilities are emptiness, the past limit of the meditative stabilities cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the meditative stabilities are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the dhāraṇī gateways are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the dhāraṇī gateways are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the dhāraṇī gateways are emptiness, the past limit of the dhāraṇī gateways cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the dhāraṇī gateways are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the powers of the tathāgatas are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the powers of the tathāgatas are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the powers of the tathāgatas are emptiness, the past limit of the powers of the tathāgatas cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the powers of the tathāgatas are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the fearlessnesses are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fearlessnesses are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the fearlessnesses are emptiness, the past limit of the fearlessnesses cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the fearlessnesses are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the kinds of exact knowledge are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the kinds of exact knowledge are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the kinds of exact knowledge are emptiness, the past limit of the kinds of exact knowledge cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the kinds of exact knowledge are beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because great compassion is beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, great compassion is the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because great compassion is emptiness, the past limit of great compassion cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because great compassion is beyond all limits.
“You said, ‘Why should one know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are beyond all limits?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the distinct qualities of the buddhas are the same as space. If you ask why, it is because just as in space the limit of the past cannot be apprehended, the limit of the future cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended, but, because the limitless is beyond all limits it is expressed with the name ‘space,’ similarly, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are emptiness, the past limit of the distinct qualities of the buddhas cannot be apprehended, the future limit cannot be apprehended, and the middle cannot be apprehended. In emptiness a limit or a middle cannot be apprehended. For that reason, Śāradvatīputra, one should know that bodhisattvas are beyond all limits, because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are beyond all limits.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you said, ‘Why can it not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that “physical forms are a bodhisattva”; not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that “feelings are a bodhisattva”; not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that “perceptions are a bodhisattva”; not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that “formative predispositions are a bodhisattva”; and not even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that “consciousness is a bodhisattva”?’ 
“Physical forms are empty of physical forms. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no physical forms, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘physical forms are a bodhisattva.’ Feelings are empty of feelings. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no feelings, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings are a bodhisattva.’ Perceptions are empty of perceptions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no perceptions, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘perceptions are a bodhisattva.’ Formative predispositions are empty of formative predispositions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no formative predispositions, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘formative predispositions are a bodhisattva.’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, consciousness is empty of consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no consciousness, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘consciousness is a bodhisattva.’
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are empty of the eyes. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no eyes, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the eyes are a bodhisattva.’ The ears are empty of the ears. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no ears, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the ears are a bodhisattva.’ The nose is empty of the nose. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no nose, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the nose is a bodhisattva.’ The tongue is empty of the tongue. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no tongue, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the tongue is a bodhisattva.’ The body is empty of the body. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no body, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the body is a bodhisattva.’ The mental faculty is empty of the mental faculty. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no mental faculty, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the mental faculty is a bodhisattva.’
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are empty of sights. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no sights, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘sights are a bodhisattva.’ Sounds are empty of sounds. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no sounds, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘sounds are a bodhisattva.’ Odors are empty of odors. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no odors, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘odors are a bodhisattva.’ Tastes are empty of tastes. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no tastes, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘tastes are a bodhisattva.’ Tangibles are empty of tangibles. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no tangibles, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘tangibles are a bodhisattva.’ Mental phenomena are empty of mental phenomena. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no mental phenomena, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘mental phenomena are a bodhisattva.’
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is empty of visual consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no visual consciousness, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘visual consciousness is a bodhisattva.’ Auditory consciousness is empty of auditory consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no auditory consciousness, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘auditory consciousness is a bodhisattva.’ Olfactory consciousness is empty of olfactory consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no olfactory consciousness, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘olfactory consciousness is a bodhisattva.’ Gustatory consciousness is empty of gustatory consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no gustatory consciousness, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘gustatory consciousness is a bodhisattva.’ Tactile consciousness is empty of tactile consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no tactile consciousness, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘tactile consciousness is a bodhisattva.’ Mental consciousness is empty of mental consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no mental consciousness, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘mental consciousness is a bodhisattva.’
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is empty of visually compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no visually compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘visually compounded sensory contact is a bodhisattva.’ Aurally compounded sensory contact is empty of aurally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no aurally compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘aurally compounded sensory contact is a bodhisattva.’ Nasally compounded sensory contact is empty of nasally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no nasally compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘nasally compounded sensory contact is a bodhisattva.’ Lingually compounded sensory contact is empty of lingually compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no lingually compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘lingually compounded sensory contact is a bodhisattva.’ Corporeally compounded sensory contact is empty of corporeally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no corporeally compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘corporeally compounded sensory contact is a bodhisattva.’ Mentally compounded sensory contact is empty of mentally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no mentally compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘mentally compounded sensory contact is a bodhisattva.’
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are a bodhisattva.’ Feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are a bodhisattva.’ Feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are a bodhisattva.’ Feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are a bodhisattva.’ Feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are a bodhisattva.’ Feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are a bodhisattva.’
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is empty of the earth element. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no earth element, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the earth element is a bodhisattva.’ The water element is empty of the water element. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no water element, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the water element is a bodhisattva.’ The fire element is empty of the fire element. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no fire element, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the fire element is a bodhisattva.’ The wind element is empty of the wind element. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no wind element, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the wind element is a bodhisattva.’ The space element is empty of the space element. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no space element, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the space element is a bodhisattva.’ The consciousness element is empty of the consciousness element. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no consciousness element, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the consciousness element is a bodhisattva.’
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is empty of ignorance. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no ignorance, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘ignorance is a bodhisattva.’ Formative predispositions are empty of formative predispositions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no formative predispositions, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even not be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘formative predispositions are a bodhisattva.’ Consciousness is empty of consciousness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no consciousness, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘consciousness is a bodhisattva.’ Name and form are empty of name and form. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no name and form, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even not be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘name and form are a bodhisattva.’ The six sense fields are empty of the six sense fields. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are not six sense fields, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the six sense fields are a bodhisattva.’ Sensory contact is empty of sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no sensory contact, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘sensory contact is a bodhisattva.’ Sensation is empty of sensation. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no sensation, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘sensation is a bodhisattva.’ Craving is empty of craving. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no craving, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘craving is a bodhisattva.’ Grasping is empty of grasping. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no grasping, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘grasping is a bodhisattva.’ The rebirth process is empty of the rebirth process. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no rebirth process, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘the rebirth process is a bodhisattva.’ Birth is empty of birth. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no birth, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘birth is a bodhisattva.’ Aging and death are empty of aging and death. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no aging and death, and there are no bodhisattvas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason it cannot even not be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘aging and death are a bodhisattva.’
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is empty of the perfection of generosity. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no perfection of generosity, and there are no bodhisattvas. The perfection of ethical discipline is empty of the perfection of ethical discipline. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no perfection of ethical discipline, and there are no bodhisattvas. The perfection of tolerance is empty of the perfection of tolerance. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no perfection of tolerance, and there are no bodhisattvas. The perfection of perseverance is empty of the perfection of perseverance. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no perfection of perseverance, and there are no bodhisattvas. The perfection of meditative concentration is empty of the perfection of meditative concentration. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no perfection of meditative concentration, and there are no bodhisattvas. The perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no perfection of wisdom, and there are no bodhisattvas. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of internal phenomena. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of internal phenomena, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of external phenomena is empty of the emptiness of external phenomena. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of external phenomena, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of external and internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of external and internal phenomena, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of emptiness is empty of the emptiness of emptiness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of emptiness, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of great extent is empty of the emptiness of great extent. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of great extent, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of ultimate reality is empty of the emptiness of ultimate reality. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of ultimate reality, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of conditioned phenomena is empty of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of conditioned phenomena, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is empty of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of the unlimited is empty of the emptiness of the unlimited. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of the unlimited, there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is empty of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of nonexclusion is empty of the emptiness of nonexclusion. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of nonexclusion, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of inherent nature is empty of the emptiness of inherent nature. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of inherent nature, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of all phenomena is empty of the emptiness of all phenomena. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of all phenomena, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is empty of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is empty of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of nonentities is empty of the emptiness of nonentities. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of nonentities, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of essential nature is empty of the emptiness of essential nature. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of essential nature, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is empty of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, and there are no bodhisattvas. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no applications of mindfulness, and there are no bodhisattvas. The correct exertions are empty of the correct exertions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no correct exertions, and there are no bodhisattvas. The supports for miraculous ability are empty of the supports for miraculous ability. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no supports for miraculous ability, and there are no bodhisattvas. the faculties are empty of the faculties. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no faculties, and there are no bodhisattvas. the powers are empty of the powers. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no powers, and there are no bodhisattvas. The branches of enlightenment are empty of the branches of enlightenment. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no branches of enlightenment, and there are no bodhisattvas. The noble eightfold path is empty of the noble eightfold path. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no noble eightfold path, and there are no bodhisattvas. 
“The truths of the noble ones are empty of the truths of the noble ones. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no truths of the noble ones, and there are no bodhisattvas. The meditative concentrations are empty of the meditative concentrations. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no meditative concentrations, and there are no bodhisattvas. The immeasurable attitudes are empty of the immeasurable attitudes. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no immeasurable attitudes, and there are no bodhisattvas. The formless absorptions are empty of the formless absorptions. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no formless absorptions, and there are no bodhisattvas. The eight liberations are empty of the eight liberations. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no eight liberations, and there are no bodhisattvas. The nine serial steps of meditative absorption are empty of the nine serial steps of meditative absorption. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no nine serial steps of meditative absorption, and there are no bodhisattvas. The emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are empty of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, and there are no bodhisattvas. The extrasensory powers are empty of the extrasensory powers. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no extrasensory powers, and there are no bodhisattvas. The meditative stabilities are empty of the meditative stabilities. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no meditative stabilities, and there are no bodhisattvas. The dhāraṇī gateways are empty of the dhāraṇī gateways. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no dhāraṇī gateways, and there are no bodhisattvas. 
“the powers of the tathāgatas are empty of the powers of the tathāgatas. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no powers of the tathāgatas, and there are no bodhisattvas. The fearlessnesses are empty of the fearlessnesses. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no fearlessnesses, and there are no bodhisattvas. The kinds of exact knowledge are empty of the kinds of exact knowledge. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no kinds of exact knowledge, and there are no bodhisattvas. Great compassion is empty of great compassion. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no great compassion, and there are no bodhisattvas. The distinct qualities of the buddhas are empty of the distinct qualities of the buddhas. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no distinct qualities of the buddhas, and there are no bodhisattvas.
“The realm of phenomena is empty of the realm of phenomena. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no realm of phenomena, and there are no bodhisattvas. The real nature is empty of the real nature. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no real nature, and there are no bodhisattvas. The very limit of reality is empty of the very limit of reality. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no very limit of reality, and there are no bodhisattvas. The realm of the inconceivable is empty of the realm of the inconceivable. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no realm of the inconceivable, and there are no bodhisattvas. Omniscience is empty of omniscience. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no omniscience, and there are no bodhisattvas. The knowledge of the aspects of the path is empty of the knowledge of the aspects of the path. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no knowledge of the aspects of the path, and there are no bodhisattvas. All-aspect omniscience is empty of all-aspect omniscience. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no all-aspect omniscience, and there are no bodhisattvas. 
“The vehicle of the śrāvakas is empty of the vehicle of the śrāvakas. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no vehicle of the śrāvakas, and there are no bodhisattvas. The vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas is empty of the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, and there are no bodhisattvas. The vehicle of the buddhas is empty of the vehicle of the buddhas. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there is no vehicle of the buddhas, and there are no bodhisattvas. The śrāvakas are empty of the śrāvakas. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no śrāvakas, and there are no bodhisattvas. The pratyekabuddhas are empty of the pratyekabuddhas. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no pratyekabuddhas, and there are no bodhisattvas. The tathāgatas are empty of the tathāgatas. If you ask why, it is because in emptiness there are no tathāgatas, and there are no bodhisattvas.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, this is the reason it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘physical forms are a bodhisattva’; it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘feelings are a bodhisattva’; it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘perceptions are a bodhisattva’; it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘formative predispositions are a bodhisattva’; and it cannot even be discerned and apprehended, for instance, that ‘consciousness is a bodhisattva.’
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you said, ‘Why do you say, “Since in all respects, and in each and every way, I do not apprehend a bodhisattva, then to which bodhisattvas should I give teaching and instruction in what perfection of wisdom”?’ 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, physical forms do not exist and cannot be apprehended in physical forms, physical forms do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings, feelings do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings, and feelings do not exist and cannot be apprehended in physical forms. Physical forms and feelings do not exist and cannot be apprehended in perceptions, perceptions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in perceptions, and perceptions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in physical forms or feelings. Physical forms, feelings, and perceptions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in formative predispositions; formative predispositions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in formative predispositions; and formative predispositions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in physical forms, feelings, or perceptions. Physical forms, feelings, perceptions, and formative predispositions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in consciousness; consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in consciousness; and consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in physical forms, feelings, perceptions, or formative predispositions.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the eyes, the eyes do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the ears, the ears do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the ears, and the ears do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the eyes. The eyes and the ears do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the nose, the nose does not exist and cannot be apprehend in the nose, and the nose does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the eyes or the ears. The eyes, the ears, and the nose do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the tongue; the tongue does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the tongue; and the tongue does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the eyes, the ears, or the nose. The eyes, the ears, the nose, and the tongue do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the body; the body does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the body; and the body does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the eyes, the ears, the nose, or the tongue. The eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, and the body do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the mental faculty; the mental faculty does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the mental faculty; and the mental faculty does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, or the body.
“Sights do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sights, sights do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sounds, sounds do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sounds, and sounds do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sights. Sights and sounds do not exist and cannot be apprehended in odors, odors do not exist and cannot be apprehend in odors, and odors do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sights or sounds. Sights, sounds, and odors do not exist and cannot be apprehended in tastes; tastes do not exist and cannot be apprehended in tastes; and tastes do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sights, sounds, or odors. Sights, sounds, odors, and tastes do not exist and cannot be apprehended in tangibles; tangibles do not exist and cannot be apprehended in tangibles; and tangibles do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sights, sounds, odors, or tastes. Sights, sounds, odors, tastes, and tangibles do not exist and cannot be apprehended in mental phenomena; mental phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended in mental phenomena; and mental phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sights, sounds, odors, tastes, or tangibles.
“Visual consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visual consciousness, visual consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in auditory consciousness, auditory consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in auditory consciousness, and auditory consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visual consciousness. Visual consciousness and auditory consciousness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in olfactory consciousness, olfactory consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehend in olfactory consciousness, and olfactory consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visual consciousness or auditory consciousness. Visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, and olfactory consciousness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in gustatory consciousness; gustatory consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in gustatory consciousness; and gustatory consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, or olfactory consciousness. Visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, olfactory consciousness, and gustatory consciousness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in tactile consciousness; tactile consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in tactile consciousness; and tactile consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, olfactory consciousness, or gustatory consciousness. Visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, olfactory consciousness, gustatory consciousness, and tactile consciousness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in mental consciousness; mental consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in mental consciousness; and mental consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, olfactory consciousness, gustatory consciousness, or tactile consciousness.
“Visually compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visually compounded sensory contact, visually compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in aurally compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in aurally compounded sensory contact, and aurally compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visually compounded sensory contact. Visually compounded sensory contact and aurally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in nasally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehend in nasally compounded sensory contact, and nasally compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visually compounded sensory contact or aurally compounded sensory contact. Visually compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact, and nasally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in lingually compounded sensory contact; lingually compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in lingually compounded sensory contact; and lingually compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visually compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact, or nasally compounded sensory contact. Visually compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact, and lingually compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in corporeally compounded sensory contact; corporeally compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in corporeally compounded sensory contact; and corporeally compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visually compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact, or lingually compounded sensory contact. Visually compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact, lingually compounded sensory contact, and corporeally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in mentally compounded sensory contact; mentally compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in mentally compounded sensory contact; and mentally compounded sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in visually compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact, lingually compounded sensory contact, or corporeally compounded sensory contact.
“Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact. Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact and feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehend in feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact or feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact. Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact; and feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, or feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact. Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact; and feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, or feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact. Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact; feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, or feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact. 
“The earth element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the earth element, the earth element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the water element, the water element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the water element, and the water element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the earth element. The earth element and the water element do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the fire element, the fire element does not exist and cannot be apprehend in the fire element, and the fire element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the earth element or the water element. The earth element, the water element, and the fire element do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the wind element; the wind element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the wind element; and the wind element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the earth element, the water element, or the fire element. The earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the wind element do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the space element; the space element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the space element; and the space element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the earth element, the water element, the fire element, or the wind element. The earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, and the space element do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the consciousness element; the consciousness element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the consciousness element; and the consciousness element does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, or the space element.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance does not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, ignorance does not exist and cannot be apprehended in formative predispositions, formative predispositions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in formative predispositions, and formative predispositions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance. Ignorance and formative predispositions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in consciousness, consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehend in consciousness, and consciousness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance or formative predispositions. Ignorance, formative predispositions, and consciousness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in name and form; name and form do not exist and cannot be apprehended in name and form; and name and form do not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, or consciousness. Ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, and name and form do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the six sense fields; the six sense fields do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the six sense fields; and the six sense fields do not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, or name and form. Ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, and the six sense fields do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sensory contact; sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in sensory contact; and sensory contact does not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, or the six sense fields. Ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, and sensory contact do not exist and cannot be apprehended in sensation; sensation does not exist and cannot be apprehended in sensation; and sensation does not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, or sensory contact. Ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, and sensation do not exist and cannot be apprehended in craving; craving does not exist and cannot be apprehended in craving; and craving does not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, or sensation. Ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, and craving do not exist and cannot be apprehended in grasping; grasping does not exist and cannot be apprehended in grasping; and grasping does not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, or craving. Ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, and grasping do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the rebirth process; the rebirth process does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the rebirth process; and the rebirth process does not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, or grasping. Ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, grasping, and the rebirth process do not exist and cannot be apprehended in birth; birth does not exist and cannot be apprehended in birth; and birth does not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, grasping, or the rebirth process. Ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, grasping, the rebirth process, and birth do not exist and cannot be apprehended in aging and death; aging and death do not exist and cannot be apprehended in aging and death; and aging and death do not exist and cannot be apprehended in ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, the six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, grasping, the rebirth process, or birth.
“The perfection of generosity does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of generosity, the perfection of generosity does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of ethical discipline does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of ethical discipline, and the perfection of ethical discipline does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of generosity. The perfection of generosity and the perfection of ethical discipline do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of tolerance does not exist and cannot be apprehend in the perfection of tolerance, and the perfection of tolerance does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of generosity or the perfection of ethical discipline. The perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, and the perfection of tolerance do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of perseverance; the perfection of perseverance does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of perseverance; and the perfection of perseverance does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, or the perfection of tolerance. The perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, and the perfection of perseverance do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of meditative concentration; the perfection of meditative concentration does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of meditative concentration; and the perfection of meditative concentration does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, or the perfection of perseverance. The perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of perseverance, and the perfection of meditative concentration do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of wisdom; the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of wisdom; and the perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethical discipline, the perfection of tolerance, the perfection of perseverance, or the perfection of meditative concentration.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of internal phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of external phenomena, and the emptiness of external phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena. 
“The emptiness of internal phenomena and the emptiness of external phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, and the emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena or the emptiness of external phenomena.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, and the emptiness of external and internal phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of emptiness, and the emptiness of emptiness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, or the emptiness of external and internal phenomena.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, and the emptiness of emptiness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of great extent does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of great extent, and the emptiness of great extent does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, or the emptiness of emptiness.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, and the emptiness of great extent do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of ultimate reality; the emptiness of ultimate reality does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of ultimate reality; and the emptiness of ultimate reality does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, or the emptiness of great extent.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, and the emptiness of ultimate reality do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of conditioned phenomena; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of conditioned phenomena; and the emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, or the emptiness of ultimate reality.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, and the emptiness of conditioned phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena; and the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, or the emptiness of conditioned phenomena.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, and the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of the unlimited; the emptiness of the unlimited does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of the unlimited; and the emptiness of the unlimited does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, or the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, and the emptiness of the unlimited do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end; and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, or the emptiness of the unlimited.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of nonexclusion; the emptiness of nonexclusion does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of nonexclusion; and the emptiness of nonexclusion does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, or the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, and the emptiness of nonexclusion do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of inherent nature; the emptiness of inherent nature does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of inherent nature; and the emptiness of inherent nature does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, or the emptiness of nonexclusion.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, and the emptiness of inherent nature do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of all phenomena; the emptiness of all phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of all phenomena; and the emptiness of all phenomena does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, or the emptiness of inherent nature.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, and the emptiness of all phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics; and the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, or the emptiness of all phenomena.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, and the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended; and the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, or the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, and the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of nonentities; the emptiness of nonentities does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of nonentities; and the emptiness of nonentities does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, or the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, and the emptiness of nonentities do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of essential nature; the emptiness of essential nature does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of essential nature; and the emptiness of essential nature does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, or the emptiness of nonentities. 
“The emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the emptiness of nonentities, and the emptiness of essential nature do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of nonexclusion, the emptiness of inherent nature, the emptiness of all phenomena, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, or the emptiness of essential nature.
“The applications of mindfulness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the applications of mindfulness, the applications of mindfulness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the correct exertions, the correct exertions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the correct exertions, and the correct exertions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the applications of mindfulness. 
“The applications of mindfulness and the correct exertions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the supports for miraculous ability, the supports for miraculous ability do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the supports for miraculous ability, and the supports for miraculous ability do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the applications of mindfulness or the correct exertions.
“The applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, and the supports for miraculous ability do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the faculties; the faculties do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the faculties; and the faculties do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, or the supports for miraculous ability.
“The applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, and the faculties do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the powers; the powers do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the powers; and the powers do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, or the faculties.
“The applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, and the powers do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the branches of enlightenment; the branches of enlightenment do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the branches of enlightenment; and the branches of enlightenment do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, or the powers.
“The applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, and the branches of enlightenment do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the path; the path does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the path; and the path does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, or the branches of enlightenment.
“The truths of the noble ones do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones, the truths of the noble ones do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the meditative concentrations, the meditative concentrations do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the meditative concentrations, and the meditative concentrations do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones. 
“The truths of the noble ones and the meditative concentrations do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the immeasurable attitudes, the immeasurable attitudes do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the immeasurable attitudes, and the immeasurable attitudes do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones or the meditative concentrations.
“The truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, and the immeasurable attitudes do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the formless absorptions; the formless absorptions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the formless absorptions; and the formless absorptions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, or the immeasurable attitudes.
“The truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, and the formless absorptions do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the liberations; the liberations do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the liberations; and the liberations do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, or the formless absorptions.
“The truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, and the liberations do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the serial steps of meditative absorption; the serial steps of meditative absorption do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the serial steps of meditative absorption; and the serial steps of meditative absorption do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, or the liberations.
“The truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the liberations, and the serial steps of meditative absorption do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the gateways to liberation; the gateways to liberation do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the gateways to liberation; and the gateways to liberation do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the liberations, or the serial steps of meditative absorption.
“The truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the liberations, the serial steps of meditative absorption, and the gateways to liberation do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the extrasensory powers; the extrasensory powers do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the extrasensory powers; and the extrasensory powers do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the liberations, the serial steps of meditative absorption, or the gateways to liberation.
“The truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the liberations, the serial steps of meditative absorption, the gateways to liberation, and the extrasensory powers do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the meditative stabilities; the meditative stabilities do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the meditative stabilities; and the meditative stabilities do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the liberations, the serial steps of meditative absorption, the gateways to liberation, or the extrasensory powers.
“The truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the liberations, the serial steps of meditative absorption, the gateways to liberation, the extrasensory powers, and the meditative stabilities do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the dhāraṇī gateways; the dhāraṇī gateways do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the dhāraṇī gateways; and the dhāraṇī gateways do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the truths of the noble ones, the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable attitudes, the formless absorptions, the liberations, the serial steps of meditative absorption, the gateways to liberation, the extrasensory powers, or the meditative stabilities.
“The powers of the tathāgatas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the powers of the tathāgatas, the powers of the tathāgatas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the fearlessnesses, the fearlessnesses do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the fearlessnesses, and the fearlessnesses do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the powers of the tathāgatas. 
“The powers of the tathāgatas and the fearlessnesses do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the kinds of exact knowledge, the kinds of exact knowledge do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the kinds of exact knowledge, and the kinds of exact knowledge do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the powers of the tathāgatas or the fearlessnesses.
“The powers of the tathāgatas, the fearlessnesses, and the kinds of exact knowledge do not exist and cannot be apprehended in great loving kindness; great loving kindness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in great loving kindness; and great loving kindness does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the powers of the tathāgatas, the fearlessnesses, or the kinds of exact knowledge.
“The powers of the tathāgatas, the fearlessnesses, the kinds of exact knowledge, and great loving kindness do not exist and cannot be apprehended in great compassion; great compassion does not exist and cannot be apprehended in great compassion; and great compassion does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the powers of the tathāgatas, the fearlessnesses, the kinds of exact knowledge, or great loving kindness.
“The powers of the tathāgatas, the fearlessnesses, the kinds of exact knowledge, great loving kindness, and great compassion do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the distinct qualities of the buddhas; the distinct qualities of the buddhas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the distinct qualities of the buddhas; and the distinct qualities of the buddhas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the powers of the tathāgatas, the fearlessnesses, the kinds of exact knowledge, great loving kindness, or great compassion.
“The attributes of the level of the spiritual family do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of the spiritual family, the attributes of the level of the spiritual family do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the eighth level, the attributes of those at the eighth level do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of those at the eighth level, and the attributes of those at the eighth level do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of those at the level of the spiritual family. 
“The attributes of the level of the spiritual family and the attributes of the eighth level do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of those who have entered the stream, the attributes of those who have entered the stream do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of those who have entered the stream, and the attributes of those who have entered the stream do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of the spiritual family or the attributes of the eighth level.
“The attributes of the level of the spiritual family, the attributes of the eighth level, and the attributes of those who have entered the stream do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of once-returners; the attributes of the level of once-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of once-returners; and the attributes of the level of once-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of the spiritual family, the attributes of the eighth level, or the attributes of those who have entered the stream.
“The attributes of the level of the spiritual family, the attributes of the eighth level, the attributes of those who have entered the stream, and the attributes of the level of once-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of non-returners; the attributes of the level of non-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of non-returners; and the attributes of the level of non-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of the spiritual family, the attributes of the eighth level, the attributes of those who have entered the stream, or the attributes of the level of once-returners.
“The attributes of the level of the spiritual family, the attributes of the eighth level, the attributes of those who have entered the stream, the attributes of the level of once-returners, and the attributes of the level of non-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the arhats; the attributes of the arhats do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the arhats; and the attributes of the arhats do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the attributes of the level of the spiritual family, the attributes of the eighth level, the attributes of those who have entered the stream, the attributes of the level of once-returners, or the attributes of the level of non-returners.
“The level of ordinary people does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people, the level of ordinary people does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of the spiritual family, the level of ordinary people and the level of the spiritual family do not exist and cannot be apprehended at the eighth level, the eighth level does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the eighth level, and the eighth level cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people or the level of the spiritual family.
“The level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, and the eighth level do not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of insight; the level of insight does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of insight; and the level of insight does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, or the eighth level.
“The level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, and the level of insight do not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of attenuated refinement; the level of attenuated refinement does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of attenuated refinement; and the level of attenuated refinement does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, or the level of insight.
“The level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, and the level of attenuated refinement do not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of no attachment; the level of no attachment does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of no attachment; and the level of no attachment does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, or the level of attenuated refinement.
“The level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, and the level of no attachment do not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of spiritual achievement; the level of spiritual achievement does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of spiritual achievement; and the level of spiritual achievement does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, or the level of no attachment.
“The level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, and the level of spiritual achievement do not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of the pratyekabuddhas; the level of the pratyekabuddhas does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of the pratyekabuddhas; and the level of the pratyekabuddhas does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, or the level of spiritual achievement.
“The level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, the level of spiritual achievement, and the level of the pratyekabuddhas do not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of the bodhisattvas; the level of the bodhisattvas does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of the bodhisattvas; and the level of the bodhisattvas does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, the level of spiritual achievement, or the level of the pratyekabuddhas.
“The level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, the level of spiritual achievement, the level of the pratyekabuddhas, and the level of the bodhisattvas do not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of the perfectly complete buddhas; the level of the perfectly complete buddhas does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of the perfectly complete buddhas; and the level of the perfectly complete buddhas does not exist and cannot be apprehended at the level of ordinary people, the level of the spiritual family, the eighth level, the level of insight, the level of attenuated refinement, the level of no attachment, the level of spiritual achievement, the level of the pratyekabuddhas, or the level of the bodhisattvas.
“knowledge of all the dharmas does not exist and cannot be apprehended in knowledge of all the dharmas, knowledge of all the dharmas does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the knowledge of the aspects of the path, the knowledge of the aspects of the path does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and the knowledge of the aspects of the path does not exist and cannot be apprehended in knowledge of all the dharmas.
“knowledge of all the dharmas and the knowledge of the aspects of the path do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the all-aspect omniscience, all-aspect omniscience does not exist and cannot be apprehended in all-aspect omniscience, and all-aspect omniscience does not exist and cannot be apprehended in knowledge of all the dharmas or the knowledge of the aspects of the path. 
“Those who have entered the stream do not exist and cannot be apprehended in those who have entered the stream, those who have entered the stream do not exist and cannot be apprehended in once-returners, once-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in once-returners, once-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in those who have entered the stream, those who have entered the stream and once-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in non-returners, non-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in non-returners, and non-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in those who have entered the stream or once-returners. 
“Those who have entered the stream, once-returners, and non-returners do not exist and cannot be apprehended in arhats; arhats do not exist and cannot be apprehended in arhats; and arhats do not exist and cannot be apprehended in those who have entered the stream, once-returners, or non-returners. 
“Those who have entered the stream, once-returners, non-returners, and arhats do not exist and cannot be apprehended in pratyekabuddhas; pratyekabuddhas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in pratyekabuddhas; and pratyekabuddhas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in those who have entered the stream, once-returners, non-returners, or arhats.
“Those who have entered the stream, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, and pratyekabuddhas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in bodhisattvas; bodhisattvas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in bodhisattvas; and bodhisattvas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in those who have entered the stream, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, or pratyekabuddhas.
“Those who have entered the stream, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in tathāgatas; tathāgatas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in tathāgatas; and tathāgatas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in those who have entered the stream, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, pratyekabuddhas, or bodhisattvas.
“Bodhisattvas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in bodhisattvas. Bodhisattvas do not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of wisdom. The perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended in the perfection of wisdom. The perfection of wisdom does not exist and cannot be apprehended in bodhisattvas.
“Bodhisattvas and the perfection of wisdom do not exist and cannot be apprehended in teaching and instruction. Teaching and instruction do not exist and cannot be apprehended in teaching and instruction. Teaching and instruction do not exist and cannot be apprehended in bodhisattvas or the perfection of wisdom.
“So it is, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that because all phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended, bodhisattvas do not exist and cannot be apprehended.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you also said, ‘Why do you say, “One says ‘a bodhisattva.’ It is a mere name”?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, this name bodhisattva has been designated adventitiously, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, these names physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness have been designated adventitiously. This is because a name does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not dwell anywhere. That which is a ‘mere name’ is not physical forms, it is not feelings, it is not perceptions, it is not formative predispositions, and it is not consciousness. If you ask why, it is because a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, and that which is empty is not a name, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, these names eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty have been designated adventitiously. This is because a name does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not dwell anywhere. That which is a ‘mere name’ is not the eyes, it is not the ears, it is not the nose, it is not the tongue, it is not the body, and it is not the mental faculty. If you ask why, it is because a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, and that which is empty is not a name, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, these names sights, sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena have been designated adventitiously. This is because a name does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not dwell anywhere. That which is a ‘mere name’ is not sights, it is not sounds, it is not odors, it is not tastes, it is not tangibles, and it is not mental phenomena. If you ask why, it is because a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, and that which is empty is not a name, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, these names visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, olfactory consciousness, gustatory consciousness, tactile consciousness, and mental consciousness have been designated adventitiously. This is because a name does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not dwell anywhere. That which is a ‘mere name’ is not visual consciousness, it is not auditory consciousness, it is not olfactory consciousness, it is not gustatory consciousness, it is not tactile consciousness, and it is not mental consciousness. If you ask why, it is because a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, and that which is empty is not a name, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, these names visually compounded sensory contact, aurally compounded sensory contact, nasally compounded sensory contact, lingually compounded sensory contact, corporeally compounded sensory contact, and mentally compounded sensory contact have been designated adventitiously. This is because a name does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not dwell anywhere. That which is a ‘mere name’ is not visually compounded sensory contact, it is not aurally compounded sensory contact, it is not nasally compounded sensory contact, it is not lingually compounded sensory contact, it is not corporeally compounded sensory contact, and it is not mentally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, and that which is empty is not a name, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, these names feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact have been designated adventitiously. This is because a name does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not dwell anywhere. That which is a ‘mere name’ is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, it is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, it is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, it is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, it is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and it is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact. If you ask why, it is because a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, and that which is empty is not a name, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, these names earth element, water element, fire element, wind element, space element, and consciousness element have been designated adventitiously. This is because a name does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not dwell anywhere. That which is a ‘mere name’ is not the earth element, it is not the water element, it is not the fire element, it is not the wind element, it is not the space element, and it is not the consciousness element. If you ask why, it is because a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, and that which is empty is not a name, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, these names ignorance, formative predispositions, consciousness, name and form, six sense fields, sensory contact, sensation, craving, grasping, the rebirth process, birth, and aging and death have been designated adventitiously. This is because a name does not come from anywhere, does not go anywhere, and does not dwell anywhere. That which is a ‘mere name’ is not ignorance, it is not formative predispositions, it is not consciousness, it is not name and form, it is not the six sense fields, it is not sensory contact, it is not sensation, it is not craving, it is not grasping, it is not the rebirth process, it is not birth, and it is not aging and death. If you ask why, it is because a name is empty of the essential nature of a name, and that which is empty is not a name, and so ‘one says “a bodhisattva.” It is a mere name.’ 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is a mere name. The perfection of generosity is not in the name, nor is the name in the perfection of generosity. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the perfection of generosity do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The perfection of ethical discipline is a mere name. The perfection of ethical discipline is not in the name, nor is the name in the perfection of ethical discipline. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the perfection of ethical discipline do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The perfection of tolerance is a mere name. The perfection of tolerance is not in the name, nor is the name in the perfection of tolerance. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the perfection of tolerance do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The perfection of perseverance is a mere name. The perfection of perseverance is not in the name, nor is the name in the perfection of perseverance. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the perfection of perseverance do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The perfection of meditative concentration is a mere name. The perfection of meditative concentration is not in the name, nor is the name in the perfection of meditative concentration. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the perfection of meditative concentration do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name. 
“The perfection of wisdom is a mere name. The perfection of wisdom is not in the name, nor is the name in the perfection of wisdom. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the perfection of wisdom do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena is a mere name. The emptiness of internal phenomena is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of internal phenomena. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of internal phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of external phenomena is a mere name. The emptiness of external phenomena is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of external phenomena. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of external phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of external and internal phenomena is a mere name. The emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of external and internal phenomena. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of external and internal phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of emptiness is a mere name. The emptiness of emptiness is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of emptiness. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of emptiness do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of great extent is a mere name. The emptiness of great extent is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of great extent. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of great extent do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of ultimate reality is a mere name. The emptiness of ultimate reality is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of ultimate reality. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of ultimate reality do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of conditioned phenomena is a mere name. The emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of conditioned phenomena. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of conditioned phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is a mere name. The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of the unlimited is a mere name. The emptiness of the unlimited is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of the unlimited. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of the unlimited do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is a mere name. The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of nonexclusion is a mere name. The emptiness of nonexclusion is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of nonexclusion. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of nonexclusion do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of inherent nature is a mere name. The emptiness of inherent nature is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of inherent nature. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of inherent nature do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of all phenomena is a mere name. The emptiness of all phenomena is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of all phenomena. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of all phenomena do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is a mere name. The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is a mere name. The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of nonentities is a mere name. The emptiness of nonentities is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of nonentities. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of nonentities do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of essential nature is a mere name. The emptiness of essential nature is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of essential nature. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of essential nature do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“The emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is a mere name. The emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness is a mere name. The applications of mindfulness are not in the name, nor is the name in the applications of mindfulness. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the applications of mindfulness do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the correct exertions is a mere name. The correct exertions are not in the name, nor is the name in the correct exertions. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the correct exertions do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the supports for miraculous ability is a mere name. The supports for miraculous ability are not in the name, nor is the name in the supports for miraculous ability. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the supports for miraculous ability do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the faculties is a mere name. the faculties are not in the name, nor is the name in the faculties. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the faculties do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the powers is a mere name. the powers are not in the name, nor is the name in the powers. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the powers do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the branches of enlightenment is a mere name. The branches of enlightenment are not in the name, nor is the name in the branches of enlightenment. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the branches of enlightenment do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the noble eightfold path is a mere name. The noble eightfold path is not in the name, nor is the name in the noble eightfold path. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the noble eightfold path do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones is a mere name. The truths of the noble ones are not in the name, nor is the name in the truths of the noble ones. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the truths of the noble ones do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the meditative concentrations is a mere name. The meditative concentrations are not in the name, nor is the name in the meditative concentrations. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the meditative concentrations do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the immeasurable attitudes is a mere name. The immeasurable attitudes are not in the name, nor is the name in the immeasurable attitudes. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the immeasurable attitudes do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the formless absorptions is a mere name. The formless absorptions are not in the name, nor is the name in the formless absorptions. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the formless absorptions do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the liberations is a mere name. The liberations are not in the name, nor is the name in the liberations. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the liberations do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption is a mere name. The nine serial steps of meditative absorption are not in the name, nor is the name in the nine serial steps of meditative absorption. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the nine serial steps of meditative absorption do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is a mere name. The emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are not in the name, nor is the name in the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the gateways to liberation do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the extrasensory powers is a mere name. The extrasensory powers are not in the name, nor is the name in the extrasensory powers. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the extrasensory powers do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the meditative stabilities is a mere name. The meditative stabilities are not in the name, nor is the name in the meditative stabilities. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the meditative stabilities do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the dhāraṇī gateways is a mere name. The dhāraṇī gateways are not in the name, nor is the name in the dhāraṇī gateways. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the dhāraṇī gateways do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the ten powers of the tathāgatas is a mere name. the powers of the tathāgatas are not in the name, nor is the name in the powers of the tathāgatas. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the powers of the tathāgatas do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the four fearlessnesses is a mere name. The fearlessnesses are not in the name, nor is the name in the fearlessnesses. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the fearlessnesses do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the four kinds of exact knowledge is a mere name. The kinds of exact knowledge are not in the name, nor is the name in the kinds of exact knowledge. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the kinds of exact knowledge do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, great loving kindness is a mere name. Great loving kindness is not in the name, nor is the name in great loving kindness. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is great loving kindness do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, great compassion is a mere name. Great compassion is not in the name, nor is the name in great compassion. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is great compassion do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas is a mere name. The distinct qualities of the buddhas are not in the name, nor is the name in the distinct qualities of the buddhas. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the distinct qualities of the buddhas do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, this name knowledge of all the dharmas has been designated adventitiously. knowledge of all the dharmas is not in the name, nor is the name in knowledge of all the dharmas. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is knowledge of all the dharmas do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, this name the knowledge of the aspects of the path has been designated adventitiously. The knowledge of the aspects of the path is not in the name, nor is the name in the knowledge of the aspects of the path. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is the knowledge of the aspects of the path do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, this name all-aspect omniscience has been designated adventitiously. All-aspect omniscience is not in the name, nor is the name in all-aspect omniscience. If you ask why, it is because both that which is a name and that which is all-aspect omniscience do not exist and cannot be apprehended. That is why this bodhisattva is a mere name. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you said, ‘Why do you say, “One says ‘self, self,’ even though a self has absolutely not come into being; ‘being, being,’ even though a being has absolutely not come into being; ‘life form, life form,’ even though a life form has absolutely not come into being; ‘living being, living being,’ even though a living being has absolutely not come into being; ‘life, life,’ even though a life has absolutely not come into being; ‘individual, individual,’ even though an individual has absolutely not come into being; ‘person, person,’ even though a person has absolutely not come into being; ‘one born of Manu, one born of Manu,’ even though one born of Manu has absolutely not come into being; ‘a child of Manu, a child of Manu,’ even though a child of Manu has absolutely not come into being; ‘agent, agent,’ even though an agent has absolutely not come into being; ‘experiencer, experiencer,’ even though an experiencer has absolutely not come into being; ‘knower, knower,’ even though a knower has absolutely not come into being; and ‘viewer, viewer,’ even though a viewer has absolutely not come into being”?’
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, since the self absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since a being absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since a life form absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since a living being absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since a life absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since a person absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since an individual absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since one born of Manu absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since a child of Manu absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since an agent absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since an experiencer absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since a knower absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; and since a viewer absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since physical forms absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since feelings absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since perceptions absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since formative predispositions absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; and since consciousness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since the eyes absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the ears absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the nose absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the tongue absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the body absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; and since the mental faculty absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since sights absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since sounds absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since odors absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since tastes absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since tangibles absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; and since mental phenomena absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being?
“Since visual consciousness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since auditory consciousness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since olfactory consciousness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since gustatory consciousness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since tactile consciousness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; and since mental consciousness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since visually compounded sensory contact absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since aurally compounded sensory contact absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since nasally compounded sensory contact absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since lingually compounded sensory contact absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since corporeally compounded sensory contact absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; and since mentally compounded sensory contact absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; and since feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being?
“Since the earth element absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the water element absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the fire element absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the wind element absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the space element absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; and since the consciousness element absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since ignorance absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since formative predispositions absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since consciousness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since name and form absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the six sense fields absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since sensory contact absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since sensation absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since craving absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since grasping absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the rebirth process absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since birth absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; and since aging and death absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being?
“Since the perfection of generosity absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the perfection of ethical discipline absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the perfection of tolerance absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the perfection of perseverance absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the perfection of meditative concentration absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; and since the perfection of wisdom absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since the emptiness of internal phenomena absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of external phenomena absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of external and internal phenomena absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of emptiness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of great extent absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of ultimate reality absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of conditioned phenomena absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of the unlimited absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of nonexclusion absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of inherent nature absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of all phenomena absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of nonentities absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the emptiness of essential nature absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; and since the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since the applications of mindfulness absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the correct exertions absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the supports for miraculous ability absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the faculties absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the powers absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the branches of enlightenment absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the noble eightfold path absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being?
“Since the truths of the noble ones absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the meditative concentrations absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the immeasurable attitudes absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the formless absorptions absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the eight liberations absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the nine serial steps of meditative absorption absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the extrasensory powers absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the meditative stabilities absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the dhāraṇī gateways absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the ten powers of the tathāgatas absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the four fearlessnesses absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since the four kinds of exact knowledge absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since great loving kindness absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since great compassion absolutely does not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that it comes into being; since the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being?
“Since śrāvakas absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since pratyekabuddhas absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; since bodhisattvas absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being; and since tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete perfect buddhas absolutely do not exist and cannot be apprehended, how could it be possible that they come into being?
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, where you said, ‘Similarly, are all phenomena in their essential nature nonentities?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that is so! If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because an essential nature does not arise from a conjunction.
Śāradvatīputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction?”
Subhūti replied, “Physical forms do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, feelings do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, perceptions do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, formative predispositions do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and consciousness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the ears do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the nose does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the tongue does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the body does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and the mental faculty does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction. Sights do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, sounds do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, odors do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, tastes do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, tangibles do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and mental phenomena do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction. Visual consciousness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, auditory consciousness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, olfactory consciousness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, gustatory consciousness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, tactile consciousness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and mental consciousness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction. Visually compounded sensory contact does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, aurally compounded sensory contact does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, nasally compounded sensory contact does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, lingually compounded sensory contact does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, corporeally compounded sensory contact does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and mentally compounded sensory contact does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction. Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction.
“The earth element does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the water element does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the fire element does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the wind element does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the space element does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and the consciousness element does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction.
“Ignorance does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, formative predispositions do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, consciousness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, name and form do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the six sense fields do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, sensory contact does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, sensation does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, craving does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, grasping does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the rebirth process does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, birth does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and aging and death do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction.
“The perfection of generosity does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the perfection of ethical discipline does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the perfection of tolerance does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the perfection of perseverance does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the perfection of meditative concentration does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and the perfection of wisdom does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of external phenomena does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of emptiness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of great extent does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of ultimate reality does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of the unlimited does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of nonexclusion does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of inherent nature does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of all phenomena does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of nonentities does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness of essential nature does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction.
“The applications of mindfulness do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the correct exertions do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the supports for miraculous ability do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the faculties do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the powers do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the branches of enlightenment do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and the noble eightfold path does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction.
“The truths of the noble ones do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the meditative concentrations do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the immeasurable attitudes do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the formless absorptions do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the eight liberations do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the extrasensory powers do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the meditative stabilities do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the dhāraṇī gateways do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the ten powers of the tathāgatas do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the four fearlessnesses do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, the four kinds of exact knowledge do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, great loving kindness does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, great compassion does not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas do not have an essential nature arising from a conjunction.
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“The eyes are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears. Sights are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears. Visual consciousness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears. Visually compounded sensory contact is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears. Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The earth element is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Ignorance is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The perfection of generosity is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The applications of mindfulness are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The truths of the noble ones are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is suffering is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are impermanent, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears. Sights are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears. Visual consciousness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears. Visually compounded sensory contact is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears. Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The earth element is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The perfection of generosity is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The applications of mindfulness are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The truths of the noble ones are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is suffering, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is suffering is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are suffering, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,’ replied Subhūti, “physical forms are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“The eyes are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears. Sights are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears. Visual consciousness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears. Visually compounded sensory contact is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears. Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The earth element is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Ignorance is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The perfection of generosity is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The applications of mindfulness are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The truths of the noble ones are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is nonself, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is nonself is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are nonself, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is at peace, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is at peace is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are at peace, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are empty, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are empty, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is empty, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are empty, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears. Visually compounded sensory contact is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is empty, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are empty, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is empty, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are empty, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is empty, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is empty, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is empty, but not because anything at all disappears.
“The truths of the noble ones are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are empty, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is empty, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are empty, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is empty is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are empty, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are signless, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are signless, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is signless, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are signless, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is signless, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are signless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is signless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are signless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is signless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is signless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is signless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are signless, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is signless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are signless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is signless is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are signless, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is wishless, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is wishless is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are wishless, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is virtuous is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are virtuous, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are not a basic transgression, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is not a basic transgression is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are not basic transgressions, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is uncontaminated is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are not uncontaminated, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“ Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears. Śāradvatīputra, sights are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears. Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears. Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears. Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is without affliction is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are without affliction, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are purified, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are purified, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is purified, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are purified, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is purified, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are purified, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is purified, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are purified, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is purified, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is purified, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is purified, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are purified, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is purified, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are purified, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is purified is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are purified, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is supramundane is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are supramundane, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what are all those phenomena that are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; perceptions are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and consciousness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the ears are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the nose is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the tongue is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the body is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and the mental faculty is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; sounds are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; odors are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; tastes are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; tangibles are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental phenomena are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; auditory consciousness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; olfactory consciousness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; gustatory consciousness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; tactile consciousness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and mental consciousness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; aurally compounded sensory contact is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; nasally compounded sensory contact is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; lingually compounded sensory contact is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; corporeally compounded sensory contact is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and mentally compounded sensory contact is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the water element is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the fire element is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the wind element is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the space element is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and the consciousness element is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; formative predispositions are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; consciousness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; name and form are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the six sense fields are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; sensory contact is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; sensation is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; craving is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; grasping is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the rebirth process is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; birth is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and aging and death are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of ethical discipline is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of tolerance is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of perseverance is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the perfection of meditative concentration is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and the perfection of wisdom is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external phenomena is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of emptiness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of great extent is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of ultimate reality is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of the unlimited is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonexclusion is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of inherent nature is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of all phenomena is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of nonentities is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness of essential nature is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the correct exertions are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the supports for miraculous ability are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the faculties are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the powers are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the branches of enlightenment are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and the noble eightfold path is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative concentrations are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the immeasurable attitudes are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the formless absorptions are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the eight liberations are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the extrasensory powers are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the meditative stabilities are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the dhāraṇī gateways are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the ten powers of the tathāgatas are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the four fearlessnesses are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; the four kinds of exact knowledge are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; great loving kindness is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; great compassion is unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears; and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears.
“If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which is unconditioned is a nonentity, and extinct. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are unconditioned, but not because anything at all disappears. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all phenomena are not eternal and they are not perishable.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, why are all phenomena not eternal and not perishable?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Feelings are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Perceptions are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Formative predispositions are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Consciousness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The ears are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The nose is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The tongue is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The body is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The mental faculty is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Sounds are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Odors are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Tastes are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Tangibles are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Mental phenomena are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Auditory consciousness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Olfactory consciousness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Gustatory consciousness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Tactile consciousness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Mental consciousness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Aurally compounded sensory contact is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Nasally compounded sensory contact is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Lingually compounded sensory contact is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Corporeally compounded sensory contact is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Mentally compounded sensory contact is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The water element is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The fire element is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The wind element is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The space element is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The consciousness element is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Formative predispositions are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Consciousness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Name and form are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The six sense fields are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Sensory contact is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Sensation is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Craving is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Grasping is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The rebirth process is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Birth is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Aging and death are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The perfection of ethical discipline is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The perfection of tolerance is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The perfection of perseverance is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The perfection of meditative concentration is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The perfection of wisdom is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of external phenomena is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of emptiness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of great extent is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of ultimate reality is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of the unlimited is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of nonexclusion is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of inherent nature is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of all phenomena is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of nonentities is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of essential nature is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The correct exertions are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The supports for miraculous ability are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. the faculties are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. the powers are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The branches of enlightenment are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The noble eightfold path is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The meditative concentrations are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The immeasurable attitudes are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The formless absorptions are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The eight liberations are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The nine serial steps of meditative absorption are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The extrasensory powers are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The meditative stabilities are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The dhāraṇī gateways are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The ten powers of the tathāgatas are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The four fearlessnesses are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. The four kinds of exact knowledge are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Great loving kindness is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. Great compassion is not eternal and it is not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is its inherent nature. The eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, virtuous phenomena are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Nonvirtuous phenomena are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Conditioned phenomena are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Unconditioned phenomena are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Contaminated phenomena are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. Uncontaminated phenomena are not eternal and they are not perishable. If you ask why, it is because that is their inherent nature. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is for this reason that all phenomena are in their essential nature nonentities.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you said, ‘Why do you say, “Why have physical forms not come into being, why have feelings not come into being, why have perceptions not come into being, why have formative predispositions not come into being, and why has consciousness not come into being”?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is so! If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because physical forms have not been brought about by conditions, feelings have not been brought about by conditions, perceptions have not been brought about by conditions, formative predispositions have not been brought about by conditions, and consciousness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings about physical forms, there is nothing that brings about feelings, there is nothing that brings about perceptions, there is nothing that brings about formative predispositions, and there is nothing that brings about consciousness.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The ears have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The nose has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The tongue has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The body has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The mental faculty has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Sounds have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Odors have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Tastes have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Tangibles have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Mental phenomena have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Auditory consciousness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Olfactory consciousness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Gustatory consciousness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Tactile consciousness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Mental consciousness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about.
“Visually compounded sensory contact has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Aurally compounded sensory contact has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Nasally compounded sensory contact has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Lingually compounded sensory contact has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Corporeally compounded sensory contact has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Mentally compounded sensory contact has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The water element has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The fire element has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The wind element has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The space element has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The consciousness element has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Formative predispositions have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Consciousness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Name and form have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The six sense fields have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Sensory contact has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Sensation has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Craving has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Grasping has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The rebirth process has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Birth has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Aging and death have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The perfection of ethical discipline has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The perfection of tolerance has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The perfection of perseverance has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The perfection of meditative concentration has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The perfection of wisdom has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of external phenomena has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of external and internal phenomena has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of emptiness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of great extent has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of ultimate reality has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of conditioned phenomena has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of the unlimited has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of nonexclusion has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of inherent nature has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of all phenomena has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of nonentities has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of essential nature has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The correct exertions have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The supports for miraculous ability have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. the faculties have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. the powers have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The branches of enlightenment have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The noble eightfold path has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The meditative concentrations have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The immeasurable attitudes have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The formless absorptions have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The liberations have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The serial steps of meditative absorption have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The extrasensory powers have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The meditative stabilities have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The dhāraṇī gateways have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The ten powers of the tathāgatas have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The four fearlessnesses have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. The four kinds of exact knowledge have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about. Great loving kindness has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. Great compassion has not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings it about. The eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas have not been brought about by conditions. If you ask why, it is because there is nothing that brings them about.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is for this reason that physical forms have not come into being, feelings have not come into being, perceptions have not come into being, formative predispositions have not come into being, and consciousness has not come into being.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you said, ‘Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, “Something that has not come into being is not physical forms, something that has not come into being is not feelings, something that has not come into being is not perceptions, something that has not come into being is not formative predispositions, and something that has not come into being is not consciousness”?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is so! If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because physical forms are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Feelings are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Perceptions are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Formative predispositions are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Consciousness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. 
“The eyes are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The ears are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The nose is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The tongue is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The body is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The mental faculty is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“Sights are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Sounds are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Odors are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Tastes are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Tangibles are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Mental phenomena are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“Visual consciousness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Auditory consciousness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Olfactory consciousness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Gustatory consciousness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Tactile consciousness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Mental consciousness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“Visually compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Aurally compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Nasally compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Lingually compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Corporeally compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Mentally compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“Feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“The earth element is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The water element is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The fire element is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The wind element is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The space element is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The consciousness element is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“Ignorance is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Formative predispositions are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Consciousness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Name and form are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The six sense fields are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Sensation is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Craving is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Grasping is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The rebirth process is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Birth is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Aging and death are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“The perfection of generosity is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The perfection of ethical discipline is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The perfection of tolerance is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The perfection of perseverance is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The perfection of meditative concentration is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The perfection of wisdom is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. 
“The emptiness of internal phenomena is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of external phenomena is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of external and internal phenomena is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of emptiness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of great extent is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of ultimate reality is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of conditioned phenomena is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of the unlimited is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of nonexclusion is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of inherent nature is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of all phenomena is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of nonentities is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of essential nature is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“The applications of mindfulness are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The correct exertions are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The supports for miraculous ability are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. the faculties are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. the powers are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The branches of enlightenment are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The noble eightfold path is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“The truths of the noble ones are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The meditative concentrations are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The immeasurable attitudes are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The formless absorptions are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The eight liberations are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The nine serial steps of meditative absorption are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The extrasensory powers are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The meditative stabilities are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The dhāraṇī gateways are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The ten powers of the tathāgatas are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The four fearlessnesses are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The four kinds of exact knowledge are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Great loving kindness is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. Great compassion is empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state. The eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are empty of an inherent nature. That which is empty of an inherent nature neither arises nor perishes, and that which neither arises nor perishes does not change its state.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is for this reason that something that has not come into being is not physical forms, something that has not come into being is not feelings, something that has not come into being is not perceptions, something that has not come into being is not formative predispositions, and something that has not come into being is not consciousness; that something that has not come into being is not the eyes, something that has not come into being is not the ears, something that has not come into being is not the nose, something that has not come into being is not the tongue, something that has not come into being is not the body, and something that has not come into being is not the mental faculty; that something that has not come into being is not sights, something that has not come into being is not sounds, something that has not come into being is not odors, something that has not come into being is not tastes, something that has not come into being is not tangibles, and something that has not come into being is not mental phenomena; that something that has not come into being is not visual consciousness, something that has not come into being is not auditory consciousness, something that has not come into being is not olfactory consciousness, something that has not come into being is not gustatory consciousness, something that has not come into being is not tactile consciousness, and something that has not come into being is not mental consciousness; that something that has not come into being is not visually compounded sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not aurally compounded sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not nasally compounded sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not lingually compounded sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not corporeally compounded sensory contact, and something that has not come into being is not mentally compounded sensory contact; that something that has not come into being is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and something that has not come into being is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact; that something that has not come into being is not the earth element, something that has not come into being is not the water element, something that has not come into being is not the fire element, something that has not come into being is not the wind element, something that has not come into being is not the space element, and something that has not come into being is not the consciousness element; that something that has not come into being is not ignorance, something that has not come into being is not formative predispositions, something that has not come into being is not consciousness, something that has not come into being is not name and form, something that has not come into being is not the six sense fields, something that has not come into being is not sensory contact, something that has not come into being is not sensation, something that has not come into being is not craving, something that has not come into being is not grasping, something that has not come into being is not the rebirth process, something that has not come into being is not birth, and something that has not come into being is not aging and death; that something that has not come into being is not the perfection of generosity, something that has not come into being is not the perfection of ethical discipline, something that has not come into being is not the perfection of tolerance, something that has not come into being is not the perfection of perseverance, something that has not come into being is not the perfection of meditative concentration, and something that has not come into being is not the perfection of wisdom; that something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of internal phenomena, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of external phenomena, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of emptiness, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of great extent, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of ultimate reality, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of the unlimited, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of nonexclusion, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of inherent nature, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of all phenomena, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of nonentities, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of essential nature, and something that has not come into being is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; that something that has not come into being is not the applications of mindfulness, something that has not come into being is not the correct exertions, something that has not come into being is not the supports for miraculous ability, something that has not come into being is not the faculties, something that has not come into being is not the powers, something that has not come into being is not the branches of enlightenment, and something that has not come into being is not the noble eightfold path; and that something that has not come into being is not the truths of the noble ones, something that has not come into being is not the meditative concentrations, something that has not come into being is not the immeasurable attitudes, something that has not come into being is not the formless absorptions, something that has not come into being is not the eight liberations, something that has not come into being is not the nine serial steps of meditative absorption, something that has not come into being is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, something that has not come into being is not the extrasensory powers, something that has not come into being is not the meditative stabilities, something that has not come into being is not the dhāraṇī gateways, something that has not come into being is not the ten powers of the tathāgatas, something that has not come into being is not the four fearlessnesses, something that has not come into being is not the four kinds of exact knowledge, something that has not come into being is not great loving kindness, something that has not come into being is not great compassion, something that has not come into being is not the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, something that has not come into being is not knowledge of all the dharmas, something that has not come into being is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and something that has not come into being is not all-aspect omniscience.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you also said, ‘Why do you say, “How then should one who has not come into being give teaching and instruction in the perfection of wisdom, which has also not come into being”?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because that which has not come into being is the perfection of wisdom, and that which is the perfection of wisdom has not come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the perfection of wisdom’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is for this reason that I said, ‘How then should one who has not come into being give teaching and instruction in the perfection of wisdom, which has also not come into being?’
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you also said, ‘Why do you say, “One cannot apprehend such bodhisattva great beings who are practicing for enlightenment as other than not having come into being”?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, this is because, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they do not observe that something that has not come into being is one thing and a bodhisattva another. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘a bodhisattva’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe physical forms as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘physical forms’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe feelings as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘feelings’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe perceptions as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘perceptions’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe formative predispositions as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘formative predispositions’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe consciousness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘consciousness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe the eyes as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the eyes’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the ears as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the ears’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the nose as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the nose’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the tongue as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the tongue’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the body as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the body’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the mental faculty as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the mental faculty’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe sights as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘sights’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe sounds as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘sounds’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe odors as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘odors’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe tastes as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘tastes’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe tangibles as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘tangibles’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe mental phenomena as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘mental phenomena’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe visual consciousness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘visual consciousness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe auditory consciousness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘auditory consciousness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe olfactory consciousness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘olfactory consciousness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe gustatory consciousness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘gustatory consciousness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe tactile consciousness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘tactile consciousness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe mental consciousness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘mental consciousness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe visually compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘visually compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe aurally compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘aurally compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe nasally compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘nasally compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe lingually compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘lingually compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe corporeally compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘corporeally compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe mentally compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘mentally compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe the earth element as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the earth element’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the water element as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the water element’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the fire element as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the fire element’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the wind element as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the wind element’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the space element as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the space element’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the consciousness element as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the consciousness element’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe ignorance as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘ignorance’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe formative predispositions as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘formative predispositions’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe consciousness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘consciousness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe name and form as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘name and form’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the six sense fields as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the six sense fields’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe sensory contact as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘sensory contact’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe sensation as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘sensation’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe craving as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘craving’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe grasping as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘grasping’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the rebirth process as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the rebirth process’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe birth as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘birth’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe aging and death as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘aging and death’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe the perfection of generosity as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the perfection of generosity’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the perfection of ethical discipline as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the perfection of ethical discipline’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the perfection of tolerance as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the perfection of tolerance’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the perfection of perseverance as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the perfection of perseverance’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the perfection of meditative concentration as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the perfection of meditative concentration’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the perfection of wisdom as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the perfection of wisdom’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe the emptiness of internal phenomena as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of internal phenomena’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of external phenomena as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of external phenomena’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of external and internal phenomena as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of external and internal phenomena’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of emptiness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of emptiness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of great extent as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of great extent’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of ultimate reality as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of ultimate reality’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of conditioned phenomena as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of conditioned phenomena’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of the unlimited as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of the unlimited’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of nonexclusion as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of nonexclusion’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of inherent nature as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of inherent nature’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of all phenomena as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of all phenomena’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of nonentities as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of nonentities’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of essential nature as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of essential nature’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe the applications of mindfulness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the applications of mindfulness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the correct exertions as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the correct exertions’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the supports for miraculous ability as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the supports for miraculous ability’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the faculties as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the faculties’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the powers as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the powers’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the branches of enlightenment as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the branches of enlightenment’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the noble eightfold path as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the noble eightfold path’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe the truths of the noble ones as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the truths of the noble ones’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the meditative concentrations as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the meditative concentrations’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the immeasurable attitudes as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the immeasurable attitudes’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the formless absorptions as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the formless absorptions’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the liberations as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the liberations’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the serial steps of meditative absorption as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the serial steps of meditative absorption’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the extrasensory powers as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the extrasensory powers’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the meditative stabilities as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the meditative stabilities’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the dhāraṇī gateways as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the dhāraṇī gateways’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the ten powers of the tathāgatas as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the powers of the tathāgatas’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the four fearlessnesses as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the fearlessnesses’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the four kinds of exact knowledge as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the kinds of exact knowledge’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe great loving kindness as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘great loving kindness’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe great compassion as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘great compassion’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the distinct qualities of the buddhas’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two.
“They do not observe knowledge of all the dharmas as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘knowledge of all the dharmas’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe the knowledge of the aspects of the path as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘the knowledge of the aspects of the path’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. They do not observe all-aspect omniscience as other than not having come into being. Therefore, these two phenomena—‘that which has not come into being’ and ‘all-aspect omniscience’—are without duality and cannot be divided into two. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is for this reason that one cannot apprehend such bodhisattvas who are practicing for enlightenment as other than not having come into being.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you also said, ‘Why do you say, “If, when such teachings are given, the bodhisattva great beings are not afraid, not frightened, and not terrified, then these bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom”?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because bodhisattva great beings observe all phenomena without activity. They observe all phenomena to resemble a dream, observe all phenomena to resemble a magical display, observe all phenomena to resemble a mirage, observe all phenomena to resemble an echo, observe all phenomena to resemble an optical aberration, and observe all phenomena to resemble a magical display. It is for this reason that when bodhisattva great beings are practicing the perfection of wisdom, they are not afraid, not frightened, and not terrified upon hearing this teaching.”
Then the venerable Subhūti said to the Blessed One, “Blessed Lord, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom and investigate those phenomena accordingly, at that time they do not apprehend physical forms; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘physical forms.’ At that time they do not apprehend feelings; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘feelings.’ At that time they do not apprehend perceptions; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘perceptions.’ At that time they do not apprehend formative predispositions; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘formative predispositions.’ At that time they do not apprehend consciousness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘consciousness.’
“At that time they do not apprehend the eyes; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the eyes.’ At that time they do not apprehend the ears; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the ears.’ At that time they do not apprehend the nose; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the nose.’ At that time they do not apprehend the tongue; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the tongue.’ At that time they do not apprehend the body; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the body.’ At that time they do not apprehend the mental faculty; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the mental faculty.’ 
“At that time they do not apprehend sights; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘sights.’ At that time they do not apprehend sounds; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘sounds.’ At that time they do not apprehend odors; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘odors.’ At that time they do not apprehend tastes; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘tastes.’ At that time they do not apprehend tangibles; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘tangibles.’ At that time they do not apprehend mental phenomena; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘mental phenomena.’
At that time they do not apprehend visual consciousness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘visual consciousness.’ At that time they do not apprehend auditory consciousness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘auditory consciousness.’ At that time they do not apprehend olfactory consciousness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘olfactory consciousness.’ At that time they do not apprehend gustatory consciousness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘gustatory consciousness.’ At that time they do not apprehend tactile consciousness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘tactile consciousness.’ At that time they do not apprehend mental consciousness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘mental consciousness.’
“At that time they do not apprehend visually compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘this is visually compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend aurally compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘aurally compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend nasally compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘nasally compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend lingually compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘lingually compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend corporeally compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘corporeally compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend mentally compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘mentally compounded sensory contact.’
“At that time they do not apprehend feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact.’
“At that time they do not apprehend the earth element; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the earth element.’ At that time they do not apprehend the water element; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the water element.’ At that time they do not apprehend the fire element; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the fire element.’ At that time they do not apprehend the wind element; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the wind element.’ At that time they do not apprehend the space element; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the space element.’ At that time they do not apprehend the consciousness element; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the consciousness element.’
“At that time they do not apprehend ignorance; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘ignorance.’ At that time they do not apprehend formative predispositions; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘formative predispositions.’ At that time they do not apprehend consciousness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘consciousness.’ At that time they do not apprehend name and form; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘name and form.’ At that time they do not apprehend the six sense fields; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the six sense fields.’ At that time they do not apprehend sensory contact; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘sensory contact.’ At that time they do not apprehend sensation; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘sensation.’ At that time they do not apprehend craving; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘craving.’ At that time they do not apprehend grasping; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘grasping.’ At that time they do not apprehend the rebirth process; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the rebirth process.’ At that time they do not apprehend birth; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘birth.’ At that time they do not apprehend aging and death; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘aging and death.’
“Blessed Lord, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom and investigate those phenomena accordingly, at that time they do not apprehend the perfection of generosity; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the perfection of generosity.’ At that time they do not apprehend the perfection of ethical discipline; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the perfection of ethical discipline.’ At that time they do not apprehend the perfection of tolerance; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the perfection of tolerance.’ At that time they do not apprehend the perfection of perseverance; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the perfection of perseverance.’ At that time they do not apprehend the perfection of meditative concentration; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the perfection of meditative concentration.’ At that time they do not apprehend the perfection of wisdom; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the perfection of wisdom.’
“At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of internal phenomena; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of internal phenomena.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of external phenomena; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of external phenomena.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of external and internal phenomena; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of external and internal phenomena.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of emptiness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of emptiness.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of great extent; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of great extent.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of ultimate reality; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of ultimate reality.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of conditioned phenomena; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of conditioned phenomena.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of the unlimited; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of the unlimited.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of nonexclusion; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of nonexclusion.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of inherent nature; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of inherent nature.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of all phenomena; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of all phenomena.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it ‘the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of nonentities; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of nonentities.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of essential nature; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of essential nature.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities.’
“Blessed Lord, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom and investigate those phenomena accordingly, at that time they do not apprehend the applications of mindfulness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the applications of mindfulness.’ At that time they do not apprehend the correct exertions; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the correct exertions.’ At that time they do not apprehend the supports for miraculous ability; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the supports for miraculous ability.’ At that time they do not apprehend the faculties; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the faculties.’ At that time they do not apprehend the powers; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the powers.’ At that time they do not apprehend the branches of enlightenment; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the branches of enlightenment.’ At that time they do not apprehend the noble eightfold path; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘the noble eightfold path.’
“At that time they do not apprehend the truths of the noble ones; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the truths of the noble ones.’ At that time they do not apprehend the meditative concentrations; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the meditative concentrations.’ At that time they do not apprehend the immeasurable attitudes; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the immeasurable attitudes.’ At that time they do not apprehend the formless absorptions; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the formless absorptions.’ At that time they do not apprehend the liberations; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the eight liberations.’ At that time they do not apprehend the serial steps of meditative absorption; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the nine serial steps of meditative absorption.’ At that time they do not apprehend the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation.’ At that time they do not apprehend the extrasensory powers; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the extrasensory powers.’ At that time they do not apprehend the meditative stabilities; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the meditative stabilities.’ At that time they do not apprehend the dhāraṇī gateways; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the dhāraṇī gateways.’ At that time they do not apprehend the powers of the tathāgatas; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the ten powers of the tathāgatas.’ At that time they do not apprehend the fearlessnesses; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the four fearlessnesses.’ At that time they do not apprehend the kinds of exact knowledge; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the four kinds of exact knowledge.’ At that time they do not apprehend great loving kindness; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘great loving kindness.’ At that time they do not apprehend great compassion; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate it as ‘great compassion.’ At that time they do not apprehend the distinct qualities of the buddhas; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.’ 
“Moreover, Blessed Lord, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they do not apprehend the meditative stabilities and the dhāraṇī gateways; they do not grasp, do not dwell on, are not fixated on, and do not designate them as ‘the meditative stabilities and the dhāraṇī gateways.’ If you ask why, it is because, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they do not observe physical forms, do not observe feelings, do not observe perceptions, do not observe formative predispositions, and do not observe consciousness; they do not observe the eyes, do not observe the ears, do not observe the nose, do not observe the tongue, do not observe the body, and do not observe the mental faculty; they do not observe sights, do not observe sounds, do not observe odors, do not observe tastes, do not observe tangibles, and do not observe mental phenomena; they do not observe visual consciousness, do not observe auditory consciousness, do not observe olfactory consciousness, do not observe gustatory consciousness, do not observe tactile consciousness, and do not observe mental consciousness; they do not observe visually compounded sensory contact, do not observe aurally compounded sensory contact, do not observe nasally compounded sensory contact, do not observe lingually compounded sensory contact, do not observe corporeally compounded sensory contact, and do not observe mentally compounded sensory contact; they do not observe feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, do not observe feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, do not observe feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, do not observe feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, do not observe feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and do not observe feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact; they do not observe the earth element, do not observe the water element, do not observe the fire element, do not observe the wind element, do not observe the space element, and do not observe the consciousness element; and they do not observe ignorance, do not observe formative predispositions, do not observe consciousness, do not observe name and form, do not observe the six sense fields, do not observe sensory contact, do not observe sensation, do not observe craving, do not observe grasping, do not observe the rebirth process, do not observe birth, and do not observe aging and death.
“They do not observe the perfection of generosity, do not observe the perfection of ethical discipline, do not observe the perfection of tolerance, do not observe the perfection of perseverance, do not observe the perfection of meditative concentration, and do not observe the perfection of wisdom; they do not observe the emptiness of internal phenomena, do not observe the emptiness of external phenomena, do not observe the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, do not observe the emptiness of emptiness, do not observe the emptiness of great extent, do not observe the emptiness of ultimate reality, do not observe the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, do not observe the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, do not observe the emptiness of the unlimited, do not observe the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, do not observe the emptiness of nonexclusion, do not observe the emptiness of inherent nature, do not observe the emptiness of all phenomena, do not observe the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, do not observe the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, do not observe the emptiness of nonentities, do not observe the emptiness of essential nature, and do not observe the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; they do not observe the applications of mindfulness, do not observe the correct exertions, do not observe the supports for miraculous ability, do not observe the faculties, do not observe the powers, do not observe the branches of enlightenment, and do not observe the noble eightfold path; they do not observe the truths of the noble ones, do not observe the meditative concentrations, do not observe the immeasurable attitudes, do not observe the formless absorptions, do not observe the eight liberations, do not observe the nine serial steps of meditative absorption, do not observe the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, do not observe the extrasensory powers, do not observe the meditative stabilities, do not observe the dhāraṇī gateways, do not observe the ten powers of the tathāgatas, do not observe the four fearlessnesses, do not observe the four kinds of exact knowledge, do not observe great loving kindness, do not observe great compassion, and do not observe the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas; and they do not observe knowledge of all the dharmas, do not observe the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and do not observe all-aspect omniscience. 
“If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because that nonarising of physical forms is not physical forms, therefore physical forms and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of physical forms is not physical forms. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of feelings is not feelings, therefore feelings and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of feelings is not feelings. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of perceptions is not perceptions, therefore perceptions and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of perceptions is not perceptions. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, therefore formative predispositions and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of consciousness is not consciousness, therefore consciousness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of consciousness is not consciousness.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the eyes is not the eyes, therefore the eyes and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the eyes is not the eyes. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the ears is not the ears, therefore the ears and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the ears is not the ears. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the nose is not the nose, therefore the nose and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the nose is not the nose. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the tongue is not the tongue, therefore the tongue and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If one were to ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the tongue is not the tongue. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the body is not the body, therefore the body and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the body is not the body. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the mental faculty is not the mental faculty, therefore the mental faculty and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the mental faculty is not the mental faculty.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of sights is not sights, therefore sights and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of sights is not sights. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of sounds is not sounds, therefore sounds and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of sounds is not sounds. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of odors is not odors, therefore odors and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of odors is not odors. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of sounds is not sounds, therefore sounds and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of sounds is not sounds. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of tastes is not tastes, therefore tastes and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of tastes is not tastes. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of tangibles is not tangibles, therefore tangibles and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of tangibles is not tangibles. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of mental objects is not mental objects, therefore mental objects and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of mental objects is not mental objects.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of visual consciousness is not visual consciousness, therefore visual consciousness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of visual consciousness is not visual consciousness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of auditory consciousness is not auditory consciousness, therefore auditory consciousness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of auditory consciousness is not auditory consciousness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of olfactory consciousness is not olfactory consciousness, therefore olfactory consciousness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of olfactory consciousness is not olfactory consciousness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of gustatory consciousness is not gustatory consciousness, therefore gustatory consciousness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of gustatory consciousness is not gustatory consciousness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of tactile consciousness is not tactile consciousness, therefore tactile consciousness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of tactile consciousness is not tactile consciousness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of mental consciousness is not mental consciousness, therefore mental consciousness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of mental consciousness is not mental consciousness.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of visually compounded sensory contact is not visually compounded sensory contact, therefore visually compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of visually compounded sensory contact is not visually compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of aurally compounded sensory contact is not aurally compounded sensory contact, therefore aurally compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of aurally compounded sensory contact is not aurally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of nasally compounded sensory contact is not nasally compounded sensory contact, therefore nasally compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of nasally compounded sensory contact is not nasally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of lingually compounded sensory contact is not lingually compounded sensory contact, therefore lingually compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of lingually compounded sensory contact is not lingually compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of corporeally compounded sensory contact is not corporeally compounded sensory contact, therefore corporeally compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of corporeally compounded sensory contact is not corporeally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of mentally compounded sensory contact is not mentally compounded sensory contact, therefore mentally compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of mentally compounded sensory contact is not mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If one were to ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the earth element is not the earth element, therefore the earth element and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the earth element is not the earth element. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the water element is not the water element, therefore the water element and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the water element is not the water element. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the fire element is not the fire element, therefore the fire element and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the fire element is not the fire element. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the wind element is not the wind element, therefore the wind element and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the wind element is not the wind element. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the space element is not the space element, therefore the space element and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the space element is not the space element. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element, therefore the consciousness element and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of ignorance is not ignorance, therefore ignorance and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of ignorance is not ignorance. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, therefore formative predispositions and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of consciousness is not consciousness, therefore consciousness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of consciousness is not consciousness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of name and form is not name and form, therefore name and form and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of name and form is not name and form. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the six sense fields is not the six sense fields, therefore the six sense fields and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the six sense fields is not the six sense fields. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of sensory contact is not sensory contact, therefore sensory contact and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of sensory contact is not sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of sensation is not sensation, therefore sensation and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of sensation is not sensation. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of craving is not craving, therefore craving and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of craving is not craving. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of grasping is not grasping, therefore grasping and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of grasping is not grasping. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the rebirth process is not the rebirth process, therefore the rebirth process and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the rebirth process is not the rebirth process. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of birth is not birth, therefore birth and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of birth is not birth. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of aging and death is not aging and death, therefore aging and death and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of aging and death is not aging and death.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the perfection of generosity is not the perfection of generosity, therefore the perfection of generosity and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the perfection of generosity is not the perfection of generosity. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the perfection of ethical discipline is not the perfection of ethical discipline, therefore the perfection of ethical discipline and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the perfection of ethical discipline is not the perfection of ethical discipline. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the perfection of tolerance is not the perfection of tolerance, therefore the perfection of tolerance and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the perfection of tolerance is not the perfection of tolerance. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the perfection of perseverance is not the perfection of perseverance, therefore the perfection of perseverance and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the perfection of perseverance is not the perfection of perseverance. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the perfection of meditative concentration is not the perfection of meditative concentration, therefore the perfection of meditative concentration and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the perfection of meditative concentration is not the perfection of meditative concentration. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom, therefore the perfection of wisdom and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of internal phenomena is not the emptiness of internal phenomena, therefore the emptiness of internal phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of internal phenomena is not the emptiness of internal phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of external phenomena is not the emptiness of external phenomena, therefore the emptiness of external phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of external phenomena is not the emptiness of external phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, therefore the emptiness of external and internal phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of emptiness is not the emptiness of emptiness, therefore the emptiness of emptiness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of emptiness is not the emptiness of emptiness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of great extent is not the emptiness of great extent, therefore the emptiness of great extent and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of great extent is not the emptiness of great extent. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of ultimate reality is not the emptiness of ultimate reality, therefore the emptiness of ultimate reality and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of ultimate reality is not the emptiness of ultimate reality. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, therefore the emptiness of conditioned phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, therefore the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of the unlimited is not the emptiness of the unlimited, therefore the emptiness of the unlimited and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of the unlimited is not the emptiness of the unlimited. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, therefore the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of nonexclusion is not the emptiness of nonexclusion, therefore the emptiness of nonexclusion and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of nonexclusion is not the emptiness of nonexclusion. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of inherent nature is not the emptiness of inherent nature, therefore the emptiness of inherent nature and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of inherent nature is not the emptiness of inherent nature. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of all phenomena is not the emptiness of all phenomena, therefore the emptiness of all phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of all phenomena is not the emptiness of all phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, therefore the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, therefore the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of nonentities is not the emptiness of nonentities, therefore the emptiness of nonentities and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of nonentities is not the emptiness of nonentities. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of essential nature is not the emptiness of essential nature, therefore the emptiness of essential nature and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of essential nature is not the emptiness of essential nature. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, therefore the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness, therefore the applications of mindfulness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the correct exertions is not the correct exertions, therefore the correct exertions and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the correct exertions is not the correct exertions. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the supports for miraculous ability is not the supports for miraculous ability, therefore the supports for miraculous ability and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the supports for miraculous ability is not the supports for miraculous ability. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the faculties is not the faculties, therefore the faculties and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the faculties is not the faculties. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the powers is not the powers, therefore the powers and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the powers is not the powers. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the branches of enlightenment is not the branches of enlightenment, therefore the branches of enlightenment and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the branches of enlightenment is not the branches of enlightenment. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the noble eightfold path is not the noble eightfold path, therefore the noble eightfold path and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the noble eightfold path is not the noble eightfold path.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the truths of the noble ones is not the truths of the noble ones, therefore the truths of the noble ones and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the truths of the noble ones is not the truths of the noble ones. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the meditative concentrations is not the meditative concentrations, therefore the meditative concentrations and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the meditative concentrations is not the meditative concentrations. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the immeasurable attitudes is not the immeasurable attitudes, therefore the immeasurable attitudes and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the immeasurable attitudes is not the immeasurable attitudes. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the formless absorptions is not the formless absorptions, therefore the formless absorptions and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the formless absorptions is not the formless absorptions. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the liberations is not the liberations, therefore the liberations and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the liberations is not the liberations. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the serial steps of meditative absorption is not the serial steps of meditative absorption, therefore the serial steps of meditative absorption and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the serial steps of meditative absorption is not the serial steps of meditative absorption. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, therefore the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the extrasensory powers is not the extrasensory powers, therefore the extrasensory powers and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the extrasensory powers is not the extrasensory powers. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the meditative stabilities is not the meditative stabilities, therefore the meditative stabilities and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the meditative stabilities is not the meditative stabilities. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways, therefore the dhāraṇī gateways and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the powers of the tathāgatas is not the powers of the tathāgatas, therefore the powers of the tathāgatas and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the powers of the tathāgatas is not the powers of the tathāgatas. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the fearlessnesses is not the fearlessnesses, therefore the fearlessnesses and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the fearlessnesses is not the fearlessnesses. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the kinds of exact knowledge is not the kinds of exact knowledge, therefore the kinds of exact knowledge and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the kinds of exact knowledge is not the kinds of exact knowledge. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of great loving kindness is not great loving kindness, therefore great loving kindness and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of great loving kindness is not great loving kindness. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of great compassion is not great compassion, therefore great compassion and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of great compassion is not great compassion. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas, therefore the distinct qualities of the buddhas and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the distinct qualities of the buddhas is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the real nature is not the real nature, therefore the real nature and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the real nature is not the real nature. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the reality of phenomena is not the reality of phenomena, therefore the reality of phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the reality of phenomena is not the reality of phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the realm of phenomena is not the realm of phenomena, therefore the realm of phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the realm of phenomena is not the realm of phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the maturity of phenomena is not the maturity of phenomena, therefore the maturity of phenomena and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the maturity of phenomena is not the maturity of phenomena. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the very limit of reality is not the very limit of reality, therefore the very limit of reality and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the very limit of reality is not the very limit of reality. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the realm of the inconceivable is not the realm of the inconceivable, therefore the realm of the inconceivable and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the realm of the inconceivable is not the realm of the inconceivable. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of knowledge of all the dharmas is not knowledge of all the dharmas, therefore knowledge of all the dharmas and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of knowledge of all the dharmas is not knowledge of all the dharmas. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path, therefore the knowledge of the aspects of the path and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path. Blessed Lord, that nonarising of all-aspect omniscience is not all-aspect omniscience, therefore all-aspect omniscience and nonarising are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because nonarising is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the nonarising of all-aspect omniscience is not all-aspect omniscience. 
“If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because that perishing of physical forms is not physical forms, therefore physical forms and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of physical forms is not physical forms. Blessed Lord, that perishing of feelings is not feelings, therefore feelings and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of feelings is not feelings. Blessed Lord, that perishing of perceptions is not perceptions, therefore perceptions and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of perceptions is not perceptions. Blessed Lord, that perishing of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, therefore formative predispositions and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions. Blessed Lord, that perishing of consciousness is not consciousness, therefore consciousness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of consciousness is not consciousness.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of the eyes is not the eyes, therefore the eyes and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the eyes is not the eyes. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the ears is not the ears, therefore the ears and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the ears is not the ears. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the nose is not the nose, therefore the nose and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the nose is not the nose. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the tongue is not the tongue, therefore the tongue and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the tongue is not the tongue. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the body is not the body, therefore the body and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the body is not the body. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the mental faculty is not the mental faculty, therefore the mental faculty and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the mental faculty is not the mental faculty.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of sights is not sights, therefore sights and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of sights is not sights. Blessed Lord, that perishing of sounds is not sounds, therefore sounds and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of sounds is not sounds. Blessed Lord, that perishing of odors is not odors, therefore odors and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of odors is not odors. Blessed Lord, that perishing of sounds is not sounds, therefore sounds and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of sounds is not sounds. Blessed Lord, that perishing of tastes is not tastes, therefore tastes and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of tastes is not tastes. Blessed Lord, that perishing of tangibles is not tangibles, therefore tangibles and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of tangibles is not tangibles. Blessed Lord, that perishing of mental objects is not mental objects, therefore mental objects and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of mental objects is not mental objects.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of visual consciousness is not visual consciousness, therefore visual consciousness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of visual consciousness is not visual consciousness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of auditory consciousness is not auditory consciousness, therefore auditory consciousness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of auditory consciousness is not auditory consciousness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of olfactory consciousness is not olfactory consciousness, therefore olfactory consciousness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of olfactory consciousness is not olfactory consciousness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of gustatory consciousness is not gustatory consciousness, therefore gustatory consciousness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of gustatory consciousness is not gustatory consciousness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of tactile consciousness is not tactile consciousness, therefore tactile consciousness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of tactile consciousness is not tactile consciousness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of mental consciousness is not mental consciousness, therefore mental consciousness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of mental consciousness is not mental consciousness.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of visually compounded sensory contact is not visually compounded sensory contact, therefore visually compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of visually compounded sensory contact is not visually compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of aurally compounded sensory contact is not aurally compounded sensory contact, therefore aurally compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of aurally compounded sensory contact is not aurally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of nasally compounded sensory contact is not nasally compounded sensory contact, therefore nasally compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of nasally compounded sensory contact is not nasally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of lingually compounded sensory contact is not lingually compounded sensory contact, therefore lingually compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of lingually compounded sensory contact is not lingually compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of corporeally compounded sensory contact is not corporeally compounded sensory contact, therefore corporeally compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of corporeally compounded sensory contact is not corporeally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of mentally compounded sensory contact is not mentally compounded sensory contact, therefore mentally compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of mentally compounded sensory contact is not mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, therefore feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of the earth element is not the earth element, therefore the earth element and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the earth element is not the earth element. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the water element is not the water element, therefore the water element and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the water element is not the water element. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the fire element is not the fire element, therefore the fire element and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the fire element is not the fire element. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the wind element is not the wind element, therefore the wind element and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the wind element is not the wind element. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the space element is not the space element, therefore the space element and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the space element is not the space element. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element, therefore the consciousness element and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of ignorance is not ignorance, therefore ignorance and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of ignorance is not ignorance. Blessed Lord, that perishing of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, therefore formative predispositions and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions. Blessed Lord, that perishing of consciousness is not consciousness, therefore consciousness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of consciousness is not consciousness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of name and form is not name and form, therefore name and form and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of name and form is not name and form. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the six sense fields is not the six sense fields, therefore the six sense fields and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the six sense fields is not the six sense fields. Blessed Lord, that perishing of sensory contact is not sensory contact, therefore sensory contact and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of sensory contact is not sensory contact. Blessed Lord, that perishing of sensation is not sensation, therefore sensation and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of sensation is not sensation. Blessed Lord, that perishing of craving is not craving, therefore craving and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of craving is not craving. Blessed Lord, that perishing of grasping is not grasping, therefore grasping and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of grasping is not grasping. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the rebirth process is not the rebirth process, therefore the rebirth process and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the rebirth process is not the rebirth process. Blessed Lord, that perishing of birth is not birth, therefore birth and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of birth is not birth. Blessed Lord, that perishing of aging and death is not aging and death, therefore aging and death and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of aging and death is not aging and death.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of the perfection of generosity is not the perfection of generosity, therefore the perfection of generosity and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the perfection of generosity is not the perfection of generosity. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the perfection of ethical discipline is not the perfection of ethical discipline, therefore the perfection of ethical discipline and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the perfection of ethical discipline is not the perfection of ethical discipline. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the perfection of tolerance is not the perfection of tolerance, therefore the perfection of tolerance and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the perfection of tolerance is not the perfection of tolerance. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the perfection of perseverance is not the perfection of perseverance, therefore the perfection of perseverance and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the perfection of perseverance is not the perfection of perseverance. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the perfection of meditative concentration is not the perfection of meditative concentration, therefore the perfection of meditative concentration and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the perfection of meditative concentration is not the perfection of meditative concentration. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom, therefore the perfection of wisdom and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of internal phenomena is not the emptiness of internal phenomena, therefore the emptiness of internal phenomena and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of internal phenomena is not the emptiness of internal phenomena. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of external phenomena is not the emptiness of external phenomena, therefore the emptiness of external phenomena and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of external phenomena is not the emptiness of external phenomena. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, therefore the emptiness of external and internal phenomena and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of emptiness is not the emptiness of emptiness, therefore the emptiness of emptiness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of emptiness is not the emptiness of emptiness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of great extent is not the emptiness of great extent, therefore the emptiness of great extent and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of great extent is not the emptiness of great extent. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of ultimate reality is not the emptiness of ultimate reality, therefore the emptiness of ultimate reality and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of ultimate reality is not the emptiness of ultimate reality. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, therefore the emptiness of conditioned phenomena and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, therefore the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of the unlimited is not the emptiness of the unlimited, therefore the emptiness of the unlimited and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of the unlimited is not the emptiness of the unlimited. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, therefore the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of nonexclusion is not the emptiness of nonexclusion, therefore the emptiness of nonexclusion and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of nonexclusion is not the emptiness of nonexclusion. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of inherent nature is not the emptiness of inherent nature, therefore the emptiness of inherent nature and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of inherent nature is not the emptiness of inherent nature. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of all phenomena is not the emptiness of all phenomena, therefore the emptiness of all phenomena and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of all phenomena is not the emptiness of all phenomena. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, therefore the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, therefore the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of nonentities is not the emptiness of nonentities, therefore the emptiness of nonentities and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of nonentities is not the emptiness of nonentities. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of essential nature is not the emptiness of essential nature, therefore the emptiness of essential nature and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of essential nature is not the emptiness of essential nature. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, therefore the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness, therefore the applications of mindfulness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the correct exertions is not the correct exertions, therefore the correct exertions and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the correct exertions is not the correct exertions. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the supports for miraculous ability is not the supports for miraculous ability, therefore the supports for miraculous ability and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the supports for miraculous ability is not the supports for miraculous ability. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the faculties is not the faculties, therefore the faculties and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the faculties is not the faculties. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the powers is not the powers, therefore the powers and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the powers is not the powers. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the branches of enlightenment is not the branches of enlightenment, therefore the branches of enlightenment and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the branches of enlightenment is not the branches of enlightenment. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the noble eightfold path is not the noble eightfold path, therefore the noble eightfold path and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the noble eightfold path is not the noble eightfold path.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of the truths of the noble ones is not the truths of the noble ones, therefore the truths of the noble ones and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the truths of the noble ones is not the truths of the noble ones. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the meditative concentrations is not the meditative concentrations, therefore the meditative concentrations and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the meditative concentrations is not the meditative concentrations. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the immeasurable attitudes is not the immeasurable attitudes, therefore the immeasurable attitudes and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the immeasurable attitudes is not the immeasurable attitudes. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the formless absorptions is not the formless absorptions, therefore the formless absorptions and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the formless absorptions is not the formless absorptions. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the liberations is not the liberations, therefore the liberations and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the liberations is not the liberations. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the serial steps of meditative absorption is not the serial steps of meditative absorption, therefore the serial steps of meditative absorption and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the serial steps of meditative absorption is not the serial steps of meditative absorption. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, therefore the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the extrasensory powers is not the extrasensory powers, therefore the extrasensory powers and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the extrasensory powers is not the extrasensory powers. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the meditative stabilities is not the meditative stabilities, therefore the meditative stabilities and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the meditative stabilities is not the meditative stabilities. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways, therefore the dhāraṇī gateways and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the powers of the tathāgatas is not the powers of the tathāgatas, therefore the powers of the tathāgatas and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the powers of the tathāgatas is not the powers of the tathāgatas. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the fearlessnesses is not the fearlessnesses, therefore the fearlessnesses and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the fearlessnesses is not the fearlessnesses. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the kinds of exact knowledge is not the kinds of exact knowledge, therefore the kinds of exact knowledge and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the kinds of exact knowledge is not the kinds of exact knowledge. Blessed Lord, that perishing of great loving kindness is not great loving kindness, therefore great loving kindness and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If one were to ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of great loving kindness is not great loving kindness. Blessed Lord, that perishing of great compassion is not great compassion, therefore great compassion and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of great compassion is not great compassion. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas, therefore the distinct qualities of the buddhas and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the distinct qualities of the buddhas is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Blessed Lord, that perishing of knowledge of all the dharmas is not knowledge of all the dharmas, therefore knowledge of all the dharmas and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of knowledge of all the dharmas is not knowledge of all the dharmas. Blessed Lord, that perishing of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path, therefore the knowledge of the aspects of the path and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path. Blessed Lord, that perishing of all-aspect omniscience is not all-aspect omniscience, therefore all-aspect omniscience and perishing are without duality and cannot be divided into two. If you ask why, Blessed Lord, it is because perishing is not one, is not two, is not many, and is not something different. For that reason, the perishing of all-aspect omniscience is not all-aspect omniscience. 
“Furthermore, Blessed Lord, that which is called ‘physical forms’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘feelings’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘perceptions’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘formative predispositions’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘consciousness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. 
“That which is called ‘the eyes’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the ears’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the nose’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the tongue’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the body’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the mental faculty’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘sights’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘sounds’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘odors’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘tastes’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘tangibles’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘mental phenomena’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘visual consciousness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘auditory consciousness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘olfactory consciousness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘gustatory consciousness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘tactile consciousness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘mental consciousness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘visually compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘aurally compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘nasally compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘lingually compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘corporeally compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘mentally compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline.
“That which is called ‘the earth element’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the water element’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the fire element’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the wind element’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the space element’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the consciousness element’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline.
“That which is called ‘ignorance’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘formative predispositions’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘consciousness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘name and form’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the six sense fields’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘sensory contact’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘sensation’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘craving’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘grasping’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the rebirth process’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘birth’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘aging and death’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline.
“That which is called ‘the perfection of generosity’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the perfection of ethical discipline’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the perfection of tolerance’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the perfection of perseverance’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the perfection of meditative concentration’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the perfection of wisdom’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline.
“That which is called ‘the emptiness of internal phenomena’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of external phenomena’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of external and internal phenomena’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of emptiness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of great extent’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of ultimate reality’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of conditioned phenomena’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of the unlimited’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of nonexclusion’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of inherent nature’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of all phenomena’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of nonentities’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of essential nature’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline.
“That which is called ‘the applications of mindfulness’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the correct exertions’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the supports for miraculous ability’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the faculties’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the powers’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the branches of enlightenment’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the noble eightfold path’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. 
“That which is called ‘the truths of the noble ones’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the meditative concentrations’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the immeasurable attitudes’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the formless absorptions’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the liberations’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the serial steps of meditative absorption’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the extrasensory powers’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the meditative stabilities’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the dhāraṇī gateways’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the ten powers of the tathāgatas’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the four fearlessnesses’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the four kinds of exact knowledge’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘great compassion’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. 
“That which is called ‘omniscience’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘the knowledge of the aspects of the path’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline. That which is called ‘all-aspect omniscience’ is counted a phenomenon without duality and without decline.”
This completes the twelfth chapter from The Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand Lines.
Chapter 13
Then the venerable Śāradvatīputra inquired of the venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, how do they investigate these phenomena? And, Venerable Subhūti, what is a bodhisattva? What is the perfection of wisdom? What is investigation?” 
The venerable Śāradvatīputra having asked this, the venerable Subhūti then replied to him, “Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you said, ‘What is a bodhisattva?’ A being (sattva) is enlightenment (bodhi), and therefore is called a bodhisattva. With that enlightenment they know the aspects of all phenomena, but they are not attached to those phenomena. If you ask which phenomena they know the aspects of, they know the aspects of physical forms, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of feelings, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of perceptions, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of formative predispositions, but they are not attached to them; and they know the aspects of consciousness, but they are not attached to it. 
“They know the aspects of the eyes, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the ears, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the nose, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the tongue, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the body, but they are not attached to it; and they know the aspects of the mental faculty, but they are not attached to it. They know the aspects of sights, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of sounds, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of odors, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of tastes, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of tangibles, but they are not attached to them; and they know the aspects of mental phenomena, but they are not attached to them. They know the aspects of visual consciousness, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of auditory consciousness, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of olfactory consciousness, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of gustatory consciousness, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of tactile consciousness, but they are not attached to it; and they know the aspects of mental consciousness, but they are not attached to it. They know the aspects of visually compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of aurally compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of nasally compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of lingually compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of corporeally compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to it; and they know the aspects of mentally compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to it. They know the aspects of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to them; and they know the aspects of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, but they are not attached to them. 
“They know the aspects of the earth element, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the water element, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the fire element, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the wind element, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the space element, but they are not attached to it; and they know the aspects of the consciousness element, but they are not attached to it.
“They know the aspects of ignorance, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of formative predispositions, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of consciousness, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of name and form, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the six sense fields, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of sensory contact, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of sensation, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of craving, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of grasping, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the rebirth process, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of birth, but they are not attached to it; and they know the aspects of aging and death, but they are not attached to them.
“They know the aspects of the perfection of generosity, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the perfection of ethical discipline, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the perfection of tolerance, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the perfection of perseverance, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the perfection of meditative concentration, but they are not attached to it; and they know the aspects of the perfection of wisdom, but they are not attached to it. 
“They know the aspects of the emptiness of internal phenomena, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of external phenomena, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of emptiness, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of great extent, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of ultimate reality, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of the unlimited, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of nonexclusion, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of inherent nature, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of all phenomena, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of nonentities, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of the emptiness of essential nature, but they are not attached to it; and they know the aspects of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, but they are not attached to it.
“They know the aspects of the applications of mindfulness, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the correct exertions, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the supports for miraculous ability, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the faculties, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the powers, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the branches of enlightenment, but they are not attached to them; and they know the aspects of the noble eightfold path, but they are not attached to it. 
“They know the aspects of the truths of the noble ones, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the meditative concentrations, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the immeasurable attitudes, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the formless absorptions, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the liberations, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the nine serial steps of meditative absorption, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the extrasensory powers, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the meditative stabilities, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the dhāraṇī gateways, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the powers of the tathāgatas, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the fearlessnesses, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of the kinds of exact knowledge, but they are not attached to them; they know the aspects of great loving kindness, but they are not attached to it; they know the aspects of great compassion, but they are not attached to it; and they know the aspects of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, but they are not attached to them.” 
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what aspects do all phenomena come in?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied the venerable Subhūti, “the aspects, modes, and signs through which phenomena are shaped, namely, the conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, or sights, sounds, odors, tastes, and tangibles, or external and internal phenomena through which they are known––those, the aspects, modes, and signs through which they are shaped, are called ‘the aspects all phenomena come in.’
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, you said, ‘What is the perfection of wisdom?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘wisdom gone to the other side’ is the far removed. If you ask from what it is far removed, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is far removed from the aggregates. That is why it is said to be far removed. It is far removed from the sensory elements. That is why it is said to be far removed. It is far removed from the sense fields. That is why it is said to be far removed. It is far removed from all afflicted mental states. That is why it is said to be far removed. It is far removed from all sorts of opinions. That is why it is said to be far removed. It is far removed from the six classes of living beings. That is why it is said to be far removed. 
“It is far removed from the perfection of generosity, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the perfection of ethical discipline, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the perfection of tolerance, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the perfection of perseverance, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the perfection of meditative concentration, so it is said to be far removed; and far removed from the perfection of wisdom so it is said to be far removed. 
“It is far removed from the emptiness of internal phenomena, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of external phenomena, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of emptiness, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of great extent, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of ultimate reality, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of the unlimited, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of nonexclusion, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of inherent nature, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of all phenomena, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of nonentities, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness of essential nature, so it is said to be far removed; and far removed from the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, so it is said to be far removed.
“It is far removed from the applications of mindfulness, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the correct exertions, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the supports for miraculous ability, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the faculties, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the powers, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the branches of enlightenment, so it is said to be far removed; and far removed from the noble eightfold path, so it is said to be far removed.
“It is far removed from the truths of the noble ones, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the meditative concentrations, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the immeasurable attitudes, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the formless absorptions, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the liberations, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the serial steps of meditative absorption, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the extrasensory powers, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the meditative stabilities, so it is said to be far removed; and far removed from the dhāraṇī gateways, so it is said to be far removed. 
“It is far removed from the powers of the tathāgatas, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the fearlessnesses, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the kinds of exact knowledge, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from great loving kindness, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from great compassion, so it is said to be far removed; and far removed from the distinct qualities of the buddhas, so it is said to be far removed.
“It is far removed from knowledge of all the dharmas, so it is said to be far removed; far removed from the knowledge of the aspects of the path, so it is said to be far removed; and far removed from all-aspect omniscience, so it is said to be far removed. For this reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of wisdom is far removed.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra you also said, ‘What is investigation?’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, here, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom, they do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether physical forms are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether feelings are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether feelings are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether feelings are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether feelings are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether feelings are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether feelings are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether feelings are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether feelings are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether feelings are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether perceptions are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the eyes are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the ears are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the ears are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the ears are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the ears are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the ears are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the ears are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the ears are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the ears are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the ears are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the nose is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the nose is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the nose is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the nose is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the nose is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the nose is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the nose is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the nose is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the nose is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the tongue is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the body is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the body is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the body is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the body is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the body is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the body is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the body is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the body is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the body is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the mental faculty is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether sights are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether sights are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether sights are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether sights are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether sights are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether sights are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether sights are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether sights are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether sights are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether sounds are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether sounds are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether sounds are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether sounds are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether sounds are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether sounds are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether sounds are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether sounds are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether sounds are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether odors are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether odors are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether odors are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether odors are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether odors are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether odors are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether odors are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether odors are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether odors are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether tastes are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether tastes are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether tastes are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether tastes are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether tastes are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether tastes are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether tastes are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether tastes are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether tastes are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether tangibles are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether mental phenomena are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether visual consciousness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether auditory consciousness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether olfactory consciousness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether gustatory consciousness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether tactile consciousness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether mental consciousness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether visually compounded sensory contact is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether aurally compounded sensory contact is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether nasally compounded sensory contact is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether lingually compounded sensory contact is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether corporeally compounded sensory contact is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether mentally compounded sensory contact is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the earth element is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the water element is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the water element is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the water element is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the water element is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the water element is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the water element is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the water element is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the water element is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the water element is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the fire element is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the wind element is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the space element is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the space element is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the space element is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the space element is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the space element is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the space element is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the space element is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the space element is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the space element is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the consciousness element is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether ignorance is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether formative predispositions are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether consciousness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether name and form are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether name and form are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether name and form are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether name and form are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether name and form are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether name and form are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether name and form are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether name and form are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether name and form are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the six sense fields are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether sensory contact is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether sensation is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether sensation is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether sensation is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether sensation is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether sensation is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether sensation is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether sensation is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether sensation is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether sensation is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether craving is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether craving is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether craving is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether craving is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether craving is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether craving is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether craving is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether craving is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether craving is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether grasping is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether grasping is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether grasping is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether grasping is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether grasping is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether grasping is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether grasping is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether grasping is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether grasping is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the rebirth process is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether birth is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether birth is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether birth is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether birth is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether birth is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether birth is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether birth is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether birth is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether birth is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether aging and death are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’ 
“They do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the perfection of generosity is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the perfection of ethical discipline is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the perfection of tolerance is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the perfection of perseverance is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the perfection of meditative concentration is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the perfection of wisdom is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of internal phenomena is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of external phenomena is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of emptiness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of great extent is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of ultimate reality is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of the unlimited is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonexclusion is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of inherent nature is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of all phenomena is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of nonentities is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of essential nature is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the applications of mindfulness are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the correct exertions are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the supports for miraculous ability are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the faculties are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the powers are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the powers are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the powers are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the powers are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the powers are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the powers are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the powers are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the powers are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the powers are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the branches of enlightenment are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the noble eightfold path is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the truths of the noble ones are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the meditative concentrations are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the immeasurable attitudes are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the formless absorptions are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the liberations are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the serial steps of meditative absorption are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the extrasensory powers are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the meditative stabilities are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the dhāraṇī gateways are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the powers of the tathāgatas are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the fearlessnesses are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the kinds of exact knowledge are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether great loving kindness is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether great compassion is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘permanent’ or are ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘happiness’ or are ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘self’ or are ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘pleasant’ or are ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘empty’ or are ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘with signs’ or are ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘wished for’ or are ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘at peace’ or are ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the distinct qualities of the buddhas are ‘void’ or are ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether knowledge of all the dharmas is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether the knowledge of the aspects of the path is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’
“They do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘permanent’ or is ‘impermanent’; do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘happiness’ or is ‘suffering’; do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘self’ or is ‘selfless’; do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘pleasant’ or is ‘unpleasant’; do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘empty’ or is ‘not empty’; do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘with signs’ or is ‘signless’; do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘wished for’ or is ‘wishless’; do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘at peace’ or is ‘not at peace’; and do not investigate whether all-aspect omniscience is ‘void’ or is ‘not void.’ ” 
Śāradvatīputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of physical forms is not physical forms, the nonarising of feelings is not feelings, the nonarising of perceptions is not perceptions, the nonarising of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, and the nonarising of consciousness is not consciousness?’ 
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of the eyes is not the eyes, the nonarising of the ears is not the ears, the nonarising of the nose is not the nose, the nonarising of the tongue is not the tongue, that nonarising of the body is not the body, and the nonarising of the mental faculty is not the mental faculty?’ 
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of sights is not sights, the nonarising of sounds is not sounds, the nonarising of odors is not odors, the nonarising of tastes is not tastes, the nonarising of tangibles is not tangibles, and the nonarising of mental phenomena is not mental phenomena?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of visual consciousness is not visual consciousness, the nonarising of auditory consciousness is not auditory consciousness, the nonarising of olfactory consciousness is not olfactory consciousness, the nonarising of gustatory consciousness is not gustatory consciousness, the nonarising of tactile consciousness is not tactile consciousness, and the nonarising of mental consciousness is not mental consciousness?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of visually compounded sensory contact is not visually compounded sensory contact, the nonarising of aurally compounded sensory contact is not aurally compounded sensory contact, the nonarising of nasally compounded sensory contact is not nasally compounded sensory contact, the nonarising of lingually compounded sensory contact is not lingually compounded sensory contact, the nonarising of corporeally compounded sensory contact is not corporeally compounded sensory contact, and the nonarising of mentally compounded sensory contact is not mentally compounded sensory contact?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, the nonarising of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and the nonarising of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of the earth element is not the earth element, the nonarising of the water element is not the water element, the nonarising of the fire element is not the fire element, the nonarising of the wind element is not the wind element, the nonarising of the space element is not the space element, and the nonarising of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of ignorance is not ignorance, the nonarising of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, the nonarising of consciousness is not consciousness, the nonarising of name and form is not name and form, the nonarising of the six sense fields is not the six sense fields, the nonarising of sensory contact is not sensory contact, the nonarising of sensation is not sensation, the nonarising of craving is not craving, the nonarising of grasping is not grasping, the nonarising of the rebirth process is not the rebirth process, the nonarising of birth is not birth, and the nonarising of aging and death is not aging and death?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of the perfection of generosity is not the perfection of generosity, the nonarising of the perfection of ethical discipline is not the perfection of ethical discipline, the nonarising of the perfection of tolerance is not the perfection of tolerance, the nonarising of the perfection of perseverance is not the perfection of perseverance, the nonarising of the perfection of meditative concentration is not the perfection of meditative concentration, and the nonarising of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of the emptiness of internal phenomena is not the emptiness of internal phenomena, the nonarising of the emptiness of external phenomena is not the emptiness of external phenomena, the nonarising of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the nonarising of the emptiness of emptiness is not the emptiness of emptiness, the nonarising of the emptiness of great extent is not the emptiness of great extent, the nonarising of the emptiness of ultimate reality is not the emptiness of ultimate reality, the nonarising of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the nonarising of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the nonarising of the emptiness of the unlimited is not the emptiness of the unlimited, the nonarising of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the nonarising of the emptiness of nonexclusion is not the emptiness of nonexclusion, the nonarising of the emptiness of inherent nature is not the emptiness of inherent nature, the nonarising of the emptiness of all phenomena is not the emptiness of all phenomena, the nonarising of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the nonarising of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the nonarising of the emptiness of nonentities is not the emptiness of nonentities, the nonarising of the emptiness of essential nature is not the emptiness of essential nature, and the nonarising of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness, the nonarising of the correct exertions is not the correct exertions, the nonarising of the supports for miraculous ability is not the supports for miraculous ability, the nonarising of the faculties is not the faculties, the nonarising of the powers is not the powers, the nonarising of the branches of enlightenment is not the branches of enlightenment, the nonarising of the noble eightfold path is not the noble eightfold path, the nonarising of the truths of the noble ones is not the truths of the noble ones, the nonarising of the meditative concentrations is not the meditative concentrations, the nonarising of the immeasurable attitudes is not the immeasurable attitudes, the nonarising of the formless absorptions is not the formless absorptions, the nonarising of the liberations is not the liberations, the nonarising of the serial steps of meditative absorption is not the serial steps of meditative absorption, the nonarising of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, the nonarising of the extrasensory powers is not the extrasensory powers, the nonarising of the meditative stabilities is not the meditative stabilities, the nonarising of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways, the nonarising of the powers of the tathāgatas is not the powers of the tathāgatas, the nonarising of the fearlessnesses is not the fearlessnesses, the nonarising of the kinds of exact knowledge is not the kinds of exact knowledge, the nonarising of great loving kindness is not great loving kindness, the nonarising of great compassion is not great compassion, and the nonarising of the distinct qualities of the buddhas is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas?’
“Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The nonarising of knowledge of all the dharmas is not knowledge of all the dharmas, the nonarising of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and the nonarising of all-aspect omniscience is not all-aspect omniscience’?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are empty of physical forms, and that which is empty is not physical forms, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of physical forms is not physical forms. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings are empty of feelings, and that which is empty is not feelings, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of feelings is not feelings. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, perceptions are empty of perceptions, and that which is empty is not perceptions, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of perceptions is not perceptions. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, formative predispositions are empty of formative predispositions, and that which is empty is not formative predispositions, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, consciousness is empty of consciousness, and that which is empty is not consciousness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of consciousness is not consciousness.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are empty of the eyes, and that which is empty is not the eyes, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the eyes is not the eyes. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the ears are empty of the ears, and that which is empty is not the ears, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the ears is not the ears. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nose is empty of the nose, and that which is empty is not the nose, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the nose is not the nose. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the tongue is empty of the tongue, and that which is empty is not the tongue, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the tongue is not the tongue. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the body is empty of the body, and that which is empty is not the body, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the body is not the body. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the mental faculty is empty of the mental faculty, and that which is empty is not the mental faculty, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the mental faculty is not the mental faculty.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are empty of sights, and that which is empty is not sights, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of sights is not sights. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sounds are empty of sounds, and that which is empty is not sounds, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of sounds is not sounds. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, odors are empty of odors, and that which is empty is not odors, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of odors is not odors. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tastes are empty of tastes, and that which is empty is not tastes, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of tastes is not tastes. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tangibles are empty of tangibles, and that which is empty is not tangibles, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of tangibles is not tangibles. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mental phenomena are empty of mental phenomena, and that which is empty is not mental phenomena, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of mental phenomena is not mental phenomena.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is empty of visual consciousness, and that which is empty is not visual consciousness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of visual consciousness is not visual consciousness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, auditory consciousness is empty of auditory consciousness, and that which is empty is not auditory consciousness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of auditory consciousness is not auditory consciousness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, olfactory consciousness is empty of olfactory consciousness, and that which is empty is not olfactory consciousness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of olfactory consciousness is not olfactory consciousness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, gustatory consciousness is empty of gustatory consciousness, and that which is empty is not gustatory consciousness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of gustatory consciousness is not gustatory consciousness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tactile consciousness is empty of tactile consciousness, and that which is empty is not tactile consciousness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of tactile consciousness is not tactile consciousness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mental consciousness is empty of mental consciousness, and that which is empty is not mental consciousness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of mental consciousness is not mental consciousness.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is empty of visually compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not visually compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of visually compounded sensory contact is not visually compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, aurally compounded sensory contact is empty of aurally compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not aurally compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of aurally compounded sensory contact is not aurally compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nasally compounded sensory contact is empty of nasally compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not nasally compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of nasally compounded sensory contact is not nasally compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, lingually compounded sensory contact is empty of lingually compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not lingually compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of lingually compounded sensory contact is not lingually compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, corporeally compounded sensory contact is empty of corporeally compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not corporeally compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of corporeally compounded sensory contact is not corporeally compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mentally compounded sensory contact is empty of mentally compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not mentally compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of mentally compounded sensory contact is not mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are empty of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, and that which is empty is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is empty of the earth element, and that which is empty is not the earth element, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the earth element is not the earth element. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the water element is empty of the water element, and that which is empty is not the water element, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the water element is not the water element. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fire element is empty of the fire element, and that which is empty is not the fire element, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the fire element is not the fire element. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the wind element is empty of the wind element, and that which is empty is not the wind element, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the wind element is not the wind element. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the space element is empty of the space element, and that which is empty is not the space element, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the space element is not the space element. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the consciousness element is empty of the consciousness element, and that which is empty is not the consciousness element, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is empty of ignorance, and that which is empty is not ignorance, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of ignorance is not ignorance. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, formative predispositions are empty of formative predispositions, and that which is empty is not formative predispositions, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, consciousness is empty of consciousness, and that which is empty is not consciousness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of consciousness is not consciousness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, name and form are empty of name and form, and that which is empty is not name and form, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of name and form is not name and form. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the six sense fields are empty of the six sense fields, and that which is empty is not the six sense fields, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the six sense fields is not the six sense fields. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sensory contact is empty of sensory contact, and that which is empty is not sensory contact, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of sensory contact is not sensory contact. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sensation is empty of sensation, and that which is empty is not sensation, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of sensation is not sensation. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, craving is empty of craving, and that which is empty is not craving, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of craving is not craving. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, grasping is empty of grasping, and that which is empty is not grasping, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of grasping is not grasping. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the rebirth process is empty of the rebirth process, and that which is empty is not the rebirth process, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the rebirth process is not the rebirth process. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, birth is empty of birth, and that which is empty is not birth, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of birth is not birth. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, aging and death are empty of aging and death, and that which is empty is not aging and death, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of aging and death is not aging and death.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is empty of the perfection of generosity, and that which is empty is not the perfection of generosity, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the perfection of generosity is not the perfection of generosity. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of ethical discipline is empty of the perfection of ethical discipline, and that which is empty is not the perfection of ethical discipline, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the perfection of ethical discipline is not the perfection of ethical discipline. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of tolerance is empty of the perfection of tolerance, and that which is empty is not the perfection of tolerance, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the perfection of tolerance is not the perfection of tolerance. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of perseverance is empty of the perfection of perseverance, and that which is empty is not the perfection of perseverance, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the perfection of perseverance is not the perfection of perseverance. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of meditative concentration is empty of the perfection of meditative concentration, and that which is empty is not the perfection of meditative concentration, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the perfection of meditative concentration is not the perfection of meditative concentration. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of wisdom is empty of the perfection of wisdom, and that which is empty is not the perfection of wisdom, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of internal phenomena, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of internal phenomena, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of internal phenomena is not the emptiness of internal phenomena. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of external phenomena is empty of the emptiness of external phenomena, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of external phenomena, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of external phenomena is not the emptiness of external phenomena. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of emptiness is empty of the emptiness of emptiness, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of emptiness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of emptiness is not the emptiness of emptiness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of great extent is empty of the emptiness of great extent, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of great extent, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of great extent is not the emptiness of great extent. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of ultimate reality is empty of the emptiness of ultimate reality, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of ultimate reality, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of ultimate reality is not the emptiness of ultimate reality. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is empty of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is empty of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of the unlimited is empty of the emptiness of the unlimited, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of the unlimited, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of the unlimited is not the emptiness of the unlimited. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is empty of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of nonexclusion is empty of the emptiness of nonexclusion, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of nonexclusion, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of nonexclusion is not the emptiness of nonexclusion. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of inherent nature is empty of the emptiness of inherent nature, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of inherent nature, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of inherent nature is not the emptiness of inherent nature. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of all phenomena is empty of the emptiness of all phenomena, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of all phenomena, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of all phenomena is not the emptiness of all phenomena. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is empty of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is empty of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of nonentities is empty of the emptiness of nonentities, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of nonentities, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of nonentities is not the emptiness of nonentities. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of essential nature is empty of the emptiness of essential nature, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of essential nature, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of essential nature is not the emptiness of essential nature. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is empty of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, and that which is empty is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness, and that which is empty is not the applications of mindfulness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the correct exertions are empty of the correct exertions, and that which is empty is not the correct exertions, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the correct exertions is not the correct exertions. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the supports for miraculous ability are empty of the supports for miraculous ability, and that which is empty is not the supports for miraculous ability, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the supports for miraculous ability is not the supports for miraculous ability. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the faculties are empty of the faculties, and that which is empty is not the faculties, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the faculties is not the faculties. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the powers are empty of the powers, and that which is empty is not the powers, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the powers is not the powers. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the branches of enlightenment are empty of the branches of enlightenment, and that which is empty is not the branches of enlightenment, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the branches of enlightenment is not the branches of enlightenment. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the noble eightfold path is empty of the noble eightfold path, and that which is empty is not the noble eightfold path, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the noble eightfold path is not the noble eightfold path.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are empty of the truths of the noble ones, and that which is empty is not the truths of the noble ones, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the truths of the noble ones is not the truths of the noble ones. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the meditative concentrations are empty of the meditative concentrations, and that which is empty is not the meditative concentrations, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the meditative concentrations is not the meditative concentrations. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the immeasurable attitudes are empty of the immeasurable attitudes, and that which is empty is not the immeasurable attitudes, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the immeasurable attitudes is not the immeasurable attitudes. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the formless absorptions are empty of the formless absorptions, and that which is empty is not the formless absorptions, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the formless absorptions is not the formless absorptions. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the liberations are empty of the liberations, and that which is empty is not the liberations, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the liberations is not the liberations. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the serial steps of meditative absorption are empty of the serial steps of meditative absorption, and that which is empty is not the serial steps of meditative absorption, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the serial steps of meditative absorption is not the serial steps of meditative absorption. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are empty of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, and that which is empty is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the extrasensory powers are empty of the extrasensory powers, and that which is empty is not the extrasensory powers, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the extrasensory powers is not the extrasensory powers. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the meditative stabilities are empty of the meditative stabilities, and that which is empty is not the meditative stabilities, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the meditative stabilities is not the meditative stabilities. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the dhāraṇī gateways are empty of the dhāraṇī gateways, and that which is empty is not the dhāraṇī gateways, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the powers of the tathāgatas are empty of the powers of the tathāgatas, and that which is empty is not the powers of the tathāgatas, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the powers of the tathāgatas is not the powers of the tathāgatas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fearlessnesses are empty of the fearlessnesses, and that which is empty is not the fearlessnesses, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the fearlessnesses is not the fearlessnesses. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the kinds of exact knowledge are empty of the kinds of exact knowledge, and that which is empty is not the kinds of exact knowledge, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the kinds of exact knowledge is not the kinds of exact knowledge. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, great loving kindness is empty of great loving kindness, and that which is empty is not great loving kindness, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of great loving kindness is not great loving kindness. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, great compassion is empty of great compassion, and that which is empty is not great compassion, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of great compassion is not great compassion. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the distinct qualities of the buddhas are empty of the distinct qualities of the buddhas, and that which is empty is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the distinct qualities of the buddhas is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, knowledge of all the dharmas is empty of knowledge of all the dharmas, and that which is empty is not knowledge of all the dharmas, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of knowledge of all the dharmas is not knowledge of all the dharmas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the knowledge of the aspects of the path is empty of the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and that which is empty is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all-aspect omniscience is empty of all-aspect omniscience, and that which is empty is not all-aspect omniscience, nor does it arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the nonarising of all-aspect omniscience is not all-aspect omniscience.”
Śāradvatīputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, why do you say, ‘The perishing of physical forms is not physical forms, the perishing of feelings is not feelings, the perishing of perceptions is not perceptions, the perishing of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, and the perishing of consciousness is not consciousness?’ 
“ ‘The perishing of the eyes is not the eyes, the perishing of the ears is not the ears, the perishing of the nose is not the nose, the perishing of the tongue is not the tongue, the perishing of the body is not the body, and the perishing of the mental faculty is not the mental faculty?’ 
“ ‘The perishing of sights is not sights, the perishing of sounds is not sounds, the perishing of odors is not odors, the perishing of tastes is not tastes, the perishing of tangibles is not tangibles, and the perishing of mental phenomena is not mental phenomena?’
“ ‘The perishing of visual consciousness is not visual consciousness, the perishing of auditory consciousness is not auditory consciousness, the perishing of olfactory consciousness is not olfactory consciousness, the perishing of gustatory consciousness is not gustatory consciousness, the perishing of tactile consciousness is not tactile consciousness, and the perishing of mental consciousness is not mental consciousness?’
“ ‘The perishing of visually compounded sensory contact is not visually compounded sensory contact, the perishing of aurally compounded sensory contact is not aurally compounded sensory contact, the perishing of nasally compounded sensory contact is not nasally compounded sensory contact, the perishing of lingually compounded sensory contact is not lingually compounded sensory contact, the perishing of corporeally compounded sensory contact is not corporeally compounded sensory contact, and the perishing of mentally compounded sensory contact is not mentally compounded sensory contact?’
“ ‘The perishing of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, the perishing of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, the perishing of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, the perishing of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, the perishing of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and the perishing of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact?’
“ ‘The perishing of the earth element is not the earth element, the perishing of the water element is not the water element, the perishing of the fire element is not the fire element, the perishing of the wind element is not the wind element, the perishing of the space element is not the space element, and the perishing of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element?’
“ ‘The perishing of ignorance is not ignorance, the perishing of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, the perishing of consciousness is not consciousness, the perishing of name and form is not name and form, the perishing of the six sense fields is not the six sense fields, the perishing of sensory contact is not sensory contact, the perishing of sensation is not sensation, the perishing of craving is not craving, the perishing of grasping is not grasping, the perishing of the rebirth process is not the rebirth process, the perishing of birth is not birth, and the perishing of aging and death is not aging and death?’
“ ‘The perishing of the perfection of generosity is not the perfection of generosity, the perishing of the perfection of ethical discipline is not the perfection of ethical discipline, the perishing of the perfection of tolerance is not the perfection of tolerance, the perishing of the perfection of perseverance is not the perfection of perseverance, the perishing of the perfection of meditative concentration is not the perfection of meditative concentration, and the perishing of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom?’
“ ‘The perishing of the emptiness of internal phenomena is not the emptiness of internal phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of external phenomena is not the emptiness of external phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of emptiness is not the emptiness of emptiness, the perishing of the emptiness of great extent is not the emptiness of great extent, the perishing of the emptiness of ultimate reality is not the emptiness of ultimate reality, the perishing of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of the unlimited is not the emptiness of the unlimited, the perishing of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the perishing of the emptiness of nonexclusion is not the emptiness of nonexclusion, the perishing of the emptiness of inherent nature is not the emptiness of inherent nature, the perishing of the emptiness of all phenomena is not the emptiness of all phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the perishing of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the perishing of the emptiness of nonentities is not the emptiness of nonentities, the perishing of the emptiness of essential nature is not the emptiness of essential nature, and the perishing of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities?’
“ ‘The perishing of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness, the perishing of the correct exertions is not the correct exertions, the perishing of the supports for miraculous ability is not the supports for miraculous ability, the perishing of the faculties is not the faculties, the perishing of the powers is not the powers, the perishing of the branches of enlightenment is not the branches of enlightenment, the perishing of the noble eightfold path is not the noble eightfold path, the perishing of the truths of the noble ones is not the truths of the noble ones, the perishing of the meditative concentrations is not the meditative concentrations, the perishing of the immeasurable attitudes is not the immeasurable attitudes, the perishing of the formless absorptions is not the formless absorptions, the perishing of the liberations is not the liberations, the perishing of the serial steps of meditative absorption is not the serial steps of meditative absorption, the perishing of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, the perishing of the extrasensory powers is not the extrasensory powers, the perishing of the meditative stabilities is not the meditative stabilities, the perishing of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways, the perishing of the powers of the tathāgatas is not the powers of the tathāgatas, the perishing of the fearlessnesses is not the fearlessnesses, the perishing of the kinds of exact knowledge is not the kinds of exact knowledge, the perishing of great loving kindness is not great loving kindness, the perishing of great compassion is not great compassion, and the perishing of the distinct qualities of the buddhas is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas?’
“ ‘The perishing of knowledge of all the dharmas is not knowledge of all the dharmas, the perishing of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and the perishing of all-aspect omniscience is not all-aspect omniscience’?” 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “it is because all those phenomena—the perishing, the physical forms, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the feelings, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the perceptions, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the formative predispositions, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the consciousness, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena—the perishing, the eyes, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing the ears, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the nose, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the tongue, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the body, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the mental faculty, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics. All those phenomena—the perishing, the sights, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the sounds, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the odors, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the tastes, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the tangibles, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the mental phenomena, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics. All those phenomena—the perishing, the visual consciousness, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the auditory consciousness, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the olfactory consciousness, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the gustatory consciousness, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the tactile consciousness, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the mental consciousness, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics. All those phenomena—the perishing, the visually compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the aurally compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the nasally compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the lingually compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the corporeally compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the mentally compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics. All those phenomena—the perishing, the feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena—the perishing, the earth element, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the water element, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the fire element, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the wind element, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the space element, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the consciousness element, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena—the perishing, the ignorance, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the formative predispositions, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the consciousness, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the name and form, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the six sense fields, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the sensory contact, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the sensation, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the craving, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the grasping, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the rebirth process, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the birth, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the aging and death, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena—the perishing, the perfection of generosity, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the perfection of ethical discipline, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the perfection of tolerance, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the perfection of perseverance, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the perfection of meditative concentration, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the perfection of wisdom, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, are immaterial, and impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena—the perishing, the emptiness of internal phenomena, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of external phenomena, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of emptiness, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of great extent, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of ultimate reality, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of the unlimited, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of nonexclusion, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of inherent nature, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of all phenomena, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of nonentities, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness of essential nature, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena—the perishing, the applications of mindfulness, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the correct exertions, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the supports for miraculous ability, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the faculties, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the powers, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the branches of enlightenment, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the noble eightfold path, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the truths of the noble ones, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the meditative concentrations, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the immeasurable attitudes, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the formless absorptions, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the liberations, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the serial steps of meditative absorption, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the extrasensory powers, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the meditative stabilities, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the dhāraṇī gateways, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena—the perishing, the powers of the tathāgatas, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the fearlessnesses, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the kinds of exact knowledge, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the great loving kindness, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the great compassion, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena––the perishing, the fruit of having entered the stream, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the fruit of once-returner, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the fruit of non-returner, and that which cannot be divided into two; the perishing, the arhatship, and that which cannot be divided into two; and the perishing, the individual enlightenment, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“All those phenomena—the perishing, the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and that which cannot be divided into two, and the perishing, the all-aspect omniscience, and that which cannot be divided into two—are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for that reason the perishing of physical forms is not physical forms, the perishing of feelings is not feelings, the perishing of perceptions is not perceptions, the perishing of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, and the perishing of consciousness is not consciousness. 
“The perishing of the eyes is not the eyes, the perishing of the ears is not the ears, the perishing of the nose is not the nose, the perishing of the tongue is not the tongue, the perishing of the body is not the body, and the perishing of the mental faculty is not the mental faculty. The perishing of sights is not sights, the perishing of sounds is not sounds, the perishing of odors is not odors, the perishing of tastes is not tastes, the perishing of tangibles is not tangibles, and the perishing of mental phenomena is not mental phenomena. The perishing of visual consciousness is not visual consciousness, the perishing of auditory consciousness is not auditory consciousness, the perishing of olfactory consciousness is not olfactory consciousness, the perishing of gustatory consciousness is not gustatory consciousness, the perishing of tactile consciousness is not tactile consciousness, and the perishing of mental consciousness is not mental consciousness. The perishing of visually compounded sensory contact is not visually compounded sensory contact, the perishing of aurally compounded sensory contact is not aurally compounded sensory contact, the perishing of nasally compounded sensory contact is not nasally compounded sensory contact, the perishing of lingually compounded sensory contact is not lingually compounded sensory contact, the perishing of corporeally compounded sensory contact is not corporeally compounded sensory contact, and the perishing of mentally compounded sensory contact is not mentally compounded sensory contact. The perishing of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, the perishing of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, the perishing of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, the perishing of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, the perishing of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and the perishing of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact is not feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact.
“The perishing of the earth element is not the earth element, the perishing of the water element is not the water element, the perishing of the fire element is not the fire element, the perishing of the wind element is not the wind element, the perishing of the space element is not the space element, and the perishing of the consciousness element is not the consciousness element.
“The perishing of ignorance is not ignorance, the perishing of formative predispositions is not formative predispositions, the perishing of consciousness is not consciousness, the perishing of name and form is not name and form, the perishing of the six sense fields is not the six sense fields, the perishing of sensory contact is not sensory contact, the perishing of sensation is not sensation, the perishing of craving is not craving, the perishing of grasping is not grasping, the perishing of the rebirth process is not the rebirth process, the perishing of birth is not birth, and the perishing of aging and death is not aging and death.
“The perishing of the perfection of generosity is not the perfection of generosity, the perishing of the perfection of ethical discipline is not the perfection of ethical discipline, the perishing of the perfection of tolerance is not the perfection of tolerance, the perishing of the perfection of perseverance is not the perfection of perseverance, the perishing of the perfection of meditative concentration is not the perfection of meditative concentration, and the perishing of the perfection of wisdom is not the perfection of wisdom.
“The perishing of the emptiness of internal phenomena is not the emptiness of internal phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of external phenomena is not the emptiness of external phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of emptiness is not the emptiness of emptiness, the perishing of the emptiness of great extent is not the emptiness of great extent, the perishing of the emptiness of ultimate reality is not the emptiness of ultimate reality, the perishing of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of the unlimited is not the emptiness of the unlimited, the perishing of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the perishing of the emptiness of nonexclusion is not the emptiness of nonexclusion, the perishing of the emptiness of inherent nature is not the emptiness of inherent nature, the perishing of the emptiness of all phenomena is not the emptiness of all phenomena, the perishing of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the perishing of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, the perishing of the emptiness of nonentities is not the emptiness of nonentities, the perishing of the emptiness of essential nature is not the emptiness of essential nature, and the perishing of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities.
“The perishing of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness, the perishing of the correct exertions is not the correct exertions, the perishing of the supports for miraculous ability is not the supports for miraculous ability, the perishing of the faculties is not the faculties, the perishing of the powers is not the powers, the perishing of the branches of enlightenment is not the branches of enlightenment, the perishing of the noble eightfold path is not the noble eightfold path, the perishing of the truths of the noble ones is not the truths of the noble ones, the perishing of the meditative concentrations is not the meditative concentrations, the perishing of the immeasurable attitudes is not the immeasurable attitudes, the perishing of the formless absorptions is not the formless absorptions, the perishing of the liberations is not the liberations, the perishing of the serial steps of meditative absorption is not the serial steps of meditative absorption, the perishing of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation is not the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, the perishing of the extrasensory powers is not the extrasensory powers, the perishing of the meditative stabilities is not the meditative stabilities, the perishing of the dhāraṇī gateways is not the dhāraṇī gateways, the perishing of the powers of the tathāgatas is not the powers of the tathāgatas, the perishing of the fearlessnesses is not the fearlessnesses, the perishing of the kinds of exact knowledge is not the kinds of exact knowledge, the perishing of great loving kindness is not great loving kindness, the perishing of great compassion is not great compassion, and the perishing of the distinct qualities of the buddhas is not the distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“The perishing of knowledge of all the dharmas is not knowledge of all the dharmas, the perishing of the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and the perishing of all-aspect omniscience is not all-aspect omniscience.”
Śāradvatīputra then asked, “Subhūti, why do you say, ‘That which is called “physical forms” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “feelings” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “perceptions” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “formative predispositions” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “consciousness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. 
“ ‘That which is called “the eyes” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the ears” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the nose” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the tongue” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the body” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the mental faculty” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “sights” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “sounds” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “odors” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “tastes” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “tangibles” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “mental phenomena” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “visual consciousness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “auditory consciousness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “olfactory consciousness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “gustatory consciousness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “tactile consciousness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “mental consciousness is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “visually compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “aurally compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “nasally compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “lingually compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “corporeally compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “mentally compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality.
“ ‘That which is called “the earth element” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the water element” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the fire element” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the wind element” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the space element” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the consciousness element” is counted a phenomenon without duality.
“ ‘That which is called “ignorance” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “formative predispositions” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “consciousness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “name and form” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the six sense fields” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “sensory contact” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “sensation” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “craving” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “grasping” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the rebirth process” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “birth” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “aging and death” is counted a phenomenon without duality.
“ ‘That which is called “the perfection of generosity” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the perfection of ethical discipline” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the perfection of tolerance” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the perfection of perseverance” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the perfection of meditative concentration” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the perfection of wisdom” is counted a phenomenon without duality.
“ ‘That which is called “the emptiness of internal phenomena” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of external phenomena” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of external and internal phenomena” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of emptiness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of great extent” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of ultimate reality” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of conditioned phenomena” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of the unlimited” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of nonexclusion” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of inherent nature” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of all phenomena” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of nonentities” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of essential nature” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities” is counted a phenomenon without duality.
“ ‘That which is called “the applications of mindfulness” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the correct exertions” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the supports for miraculous ability” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the faculties” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the powers” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the branches of enlightenment” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the noble eightfold path” is counted a phenomenon without duality. 
“ ‘That which is called “the truths of the noble ones” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the meditative concentrations” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the immeasurable attitudes” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the formless absorptions” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the liberations” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the serial steps of meditative absorption” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the extrasensory powers” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the meditative stabilities” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the dhāraṇī gateways” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the ten powers of the tathāgatas” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the four fearlessnesses” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the four kinds of exact knowledge” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “great compassion” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas” is counted a phenomenon without duality. 
“ ‘That which is called “knowledge of all the dharmas” is counted a phenomenon without duality. That which is called “the knowledge of the aspects of the path” is counted a phenomenon without duality. And that which is called “all-aspect omniscience” is counted a phenomenon without duality’?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “it is because physical forms are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is physical forms, and physical forms themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘physical forms’ is counted as without duality. It is because feelings are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is feelings, and feelings themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘feelings’ is counted as without duality. It is because perceptions are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is perceptions, and perceptions themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘perceptions’ is counted as without duality. It is because formative predispositions are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is formative predispositions, and formative predispositions themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘formative predispositions’ is counted as without duality. It is because consciousness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is consciousness, and consciousness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘consciousness’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because the eyes are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the eyes, and the eyes themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the eyes’ is counted as without duality. It is because the ears are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the ears, and the ears themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the ears’ is counted as without duality. It is because the nose is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the nose, and the nose itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the nose’ is counted as without duality. It is because the tongue is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the tongue, and the tongue itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the tongue’ is counted as without duality. It is because the body is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the body, and the body itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the body’ is counted as without duality. It is because the mental faculty is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the mental faculty, and the mental faculty itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the mental faculty’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because sights are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is sights, and sights themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘sights’ is counted as without duality. It is because sounds are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is sounds, and sounds themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘sounds’ is counted as without duality. It is because odors are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is odors, and odors themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘odors’ is counted as without duality. It is because tastes are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is tastes, and tastes themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘tastes’ is counted as without duality. It is because tangibles are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is tangibles, and tangibles themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘tangibles’ is counted as without duality. It is because mental phenomena are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is mental phenomena, and mental phenomena themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘mental phenomena’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because visual consciousness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is visual consciousness, and visual consciousness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘visual consciousness’ is counted as without duality. It is because auditory consciousness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is auditory consciousness, and auditory consciousness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘auditory consciousness’ is counted as without duality. It is because olfactory consciousness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is olfactory consciousness, and olfactory consciousness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘olfactory consciousness’ is counted as without duality. It is because gustatory consciousness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is gustatory consciousness, and gustatory consciousness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘gustatory consciousness’ is counted as without duality. It is because tactile consciousness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is tactile consciousness, and tactile consciousness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘tactile consciousness’ is counted as without duality. It is because mental consciousness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is mental consciousness, and mental consciousness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘mental consciousness’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because visually compounded sensory contact is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is visually compounded sensory contact, and visually compounded sensory contact itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘visually compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because aurally compounded sensory contact is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is aurally compounded sensory contact, and aurally compounded sensory contact itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘aurally compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because nasally compounded sensory contact is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is nasally compounded sensory contact, and nasally compounded sensory contact itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘nasally compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because lingually compounded sensory contact is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is lingually compounded sensory contact, and lingually compounded sensory contact itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘lingually compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because corporeally compounded sensory contact is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is corporeally compounded sensory contact, and corporeally compounded sensory contact itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘corporeally compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because mentally compounded sensory contact is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is mentally compounded sensory contact, and mentally compounded sensory contact itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘mentally compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because the earth element is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the earth element, and the earth element itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the earth element’ is counted as without duality. It is because the water element is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the water element, and the water element itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the water element’ is counted as without duality. It is because the fire element is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the fire element, and the fire element itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the fire element’ is counted as without duality. It is because the wind element is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the wind element, and the wind element itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the wind element’ is counted as without duality. It is because the space element is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the space element, and the space element itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the space element’ is counted as without duality. It is because the consciousness element is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the consciousness element, and the consciousness element itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the consciousness element’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because ignorance is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is ignorance, and ignorance itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘ignorance’ is counted as without duality. It is because formative predispositions are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is formative predispositions, and formative predispositions themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘formative predispositions’ is counted as without duality. It is because consciousness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is consciousness, and consciousness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘consciousness’ is counted as without duality. It is because name and form are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is name and form, and name and form themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘name and form’ is counted as without duality. It is because the six sense fields are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the six sense fields, and the six sense fields themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the six sense fields’ is counted as without duality. It is because sensory contact is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is sensory contact, and sensory contact itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘sensory contact’ is counted as without duality. It is because sensation is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is sensation, and sensation itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘sensation’ is counted as without duality. It is because craving is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is craving, and craving itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘craving’ is counted as without duality. It is because grasping is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is grasping, and grasping itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘grasping’ is counted as without duality. It is because the rebirth process is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the rebirth process, and the rebirth process itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the rebirth process’ is counted as without duality. It is because birth is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is birth, and birth itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘birth’ is counted as without duality. It is because aging and death are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is aging and death, and aging and death themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘aging and death’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because the perfection of generosity is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the perfection of generosity, and the perfection of generosity itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the perfection of generosity’ is counted as without duality. It is because the perfection of ethical discipline is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the perfection of ethical discipline, and the perfection of ethical discipline itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the perfection of ethical discipline’ is counted as without duality. It is because the perfection of tolerance is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the perfection of tolerance, and the perfection of tolerance itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the perfection of tolerance’ is counted as without duality. It is because the perfection of perseverance is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the perfection of perseverance, and the perfection of perseverance itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the perfection of perseverance’ is counted as without duality. It is because the perfection of meditative concentration is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the perfection of meditative concentration, and the perfection of meditative concentration itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the perfection of meditative concentration’ is counted as without duality. It is because the perfection of wisdom is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the perfection of wisdom, and the perfection of wisdom itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the perfection of wisdom’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because the emptiness of internal phenomena is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of internal phenomena, and the emptiness of internal phenomena itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of internal phenomena’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of external phenomena is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of external phenomena, and the emptiness of external phenomena itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of external phenomena’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, and the emptiness of external and internal phenomena itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of external and internal phenomena’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of emptiness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of emptiness, and the emptiness of emptiness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of emptiness’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of great extent is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of great extent, and the emptiness of great extent itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of great extent’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of ultimate reality is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of ultimate reality, and the emptiness of ultimate reality itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of ultimate reality’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, and the emptiness of conditioned phenomena itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of conditioned phenomena’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, and the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of the unlimited is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of the unlimited, and the emptiness of the unlimited itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of the unlimited’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of nonexclusion is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of nonexclusion, and the emptiness of nonexclusion itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of nonexclusion’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of inherent nature is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of inherent nature, and the emptiness of inherent nature itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of inherent nature’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of all phenomena is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of all phenomena, and the emptiness of all phenomena itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of all phenomena’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, and the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, and the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of nonentities is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of nonentities, and the emptiness of nonentities itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of nonentities’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of essential nature is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of essential nature, and the emptiness of essential nature itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of essential nature’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because the applications of mindfulness are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the applications of mindfulness, and the applications of mindfulness themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the applications of mindfulness’ is counted as without duality. It is because the correct exertions are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the correct exertions, and the correct exertions themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the correct exertions’ is counted as without duality. It is because the supports for miraculous ability are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the supports for miraculous ability, and the supports for miraculous ability themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the supports for miraculous ability’ is counted as without duality. It is because the faculties are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the faculties, and the faculties themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the faculties’ is counted as without duality. It is because the powers are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the powers, and the powers themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the powers’ is counted as without duality. It is because the branches of enlightenment are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the branches of enlightenment. and the branches of enlightenment themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the branches of enlightenment’ is counted as without duality. It is because the noble eightfold path is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the noble eightfold path, and the noble eightfold path itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the noble eightfold path’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because the truths of the noble ones are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the truths of the noble ones, and the truths of the noble ones themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the truths of the noble ones’ is counted as without duality. It is because the meditative concentrations are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the meditative concentrations, and the meditative concentrations themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the meditative concentrations’ is counted as without duality. It is because the immeasurable attitudes are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the immeasurable attitudes, and the immeasurable attitudes themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the immeasurable attitudes’ is counted as without duality. It is because the formless absorptions are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the formless absorptions, and the formless absorptions themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the formless absorptions’ is counted as without duality. It is because the liberations are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the liberations, and the liberations themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the liberations’ is counted as without duality. It is because the serial steps of meditative absorption are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the serial steps of meditative absorption, and the serial steps of meditative absorption themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the serial steps of meditative absorption’ is counted as without duality. It is because the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, and the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation’ is counted as without duality. It is because the extrasensory powers are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the extrasensory powers, and the extrasensory powers themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the extrasensory powers’ is counted as without duality. It is because the meditative stabilities are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the meditative stabilities, and the meditative stabilities themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the meditative stabilities’ is counted as without duality. It is because the dhāraṇī gateways are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the dhāraṇī gateways, and the dhāraṇī gateways themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the dhāraṇī gateways’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because the powers of the tathāgatas are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the powers of the tathāgatas, and the powers of the tathāgatas themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the powers of the tathāgatas’ is counted as without duality. It is because the fearlessnesses are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the fearlessnesses, and the fearlessnesses themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the fearlessnesses’ is counted as without duality. It is because the kinds of exact knowledge are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the kinds of exact knowledge, and the kinds of exact knowledge themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the kinds of exact knowledge’ is counted as without duality. It is because great loving kindness is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is great loving kindness, and great loving kindness itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘great loving kindness’ is counted as without duality. It is because great compassion is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is great compassion, and great compassion itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘great compassion’ is counted as without duality. It is because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the distinct qualities of the buddhas, and the distinct qualities of the buddhas themselves are nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the distinct qualities of the buddhas’ is counted as without duality. 
“It is because the fruit of having entered the stream is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the fruit of having entered the stream, and the fruit of having entered the stream itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the fruit of having entered the stream’ is counted as without duality. It is because the fruit of once-returner is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the fruit of once-returner, and the fruit of once-returner itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the fruit of once-returner’ is counted as without duality. It is because the fruit of non-returner is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the fruit of non-returner, and the fruit of non-returner itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the fruit of non-returner’ is counted as without duality. It is because arhatship is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is arhatship, and arhatship itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘arhatship’ is counted as without duality. It is because individual enlightenment is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is individual enlightenment, and individual enlightenment itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘individual enlightenment’ is counted as without duality. It is because the knowledge of the aspects of the path is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and the knowledge of the aspects of the path itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘the knowledge of the aspects of the path’ is counted as without duality. It is because all-aspect omniscience is not one thing and nonarising another. Nonarising itself is all-aspect omniscience, and all-aspect omniscience itself is nonarising. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that which is called ‘all-aspect omniscience’ is counted as without duality.” 
Venerable Subhūti then said to the Blessed One, “Blessed Lord, when bodhisattva great beings practice the perfection of wisdom and investigate those phenomena accordingly, then, because of utter purity, they see the nonarising of physical forms, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of feelings, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of perceptions,, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of formative predispositions,, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of consciousness. 
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the eyes, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the ears, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the nose, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the tongue, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the body, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the mental faculty. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of sights, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of sounds, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of odors, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of tastes, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of tangibles, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of mental phenomena. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of visual consciousness, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of auditory consciousness, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of olfactory consciousness, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of gustatory consciousness, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of tactile consciousness, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of mental consciousness. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of visually compounded sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of aurally compounded sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of nasally compounded sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of lingually compounded sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of corporeally compounded sensory contact, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of mentally compounded sensory contact. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact.
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the earth element, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the water element, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the fire element, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the wind element, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the space element, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the consciousness element.
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of ignorance, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of formative predispositions, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of consciousness, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of name and form, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the six sense fields, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of sensory contact, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of sensation, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of craving, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of grasping, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the rebirth process, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of birth, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of aging and death.
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the perfection of generosity, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the perfection of ethical discipline, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the perfection of tolerance, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the perfection of perseverance, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the perfection of meditative concentration, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the perfection of wisdom.
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of internal phenomena, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of external phenomena, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of emptiness, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of great extent, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of ultimate reality, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of the unlimited, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of nonexclusion, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of inherent nature, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of all phenomena, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of nonentities, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of essential nature, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities.
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the applications of mindfulness, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the correct exertions, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the supports for miraculous ability, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the faculties, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the powers, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the branches of enlightenment, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the noble eightfold path. 
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the truths of the noble ones, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the meditative concentrations, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the immeasurable attitudes, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the formless absorptions, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the liberations, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the serial steps of meditative absorption, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the extrasensory powers, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the meditative stabilities, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the dhāraṇī gateways, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the powers of the tathāgatas, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the fearlessnesses, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the kinds of exact knowledge, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of great loving kindness, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of great compassion, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of knowledge of all the dharmas, because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of all-aspect omniscience.
“Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of ordinary persons, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the attributes of ordinary persons. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of those who have entered the stream, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the attributes of those who have entered the stream. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the once-returners, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the attributes of the once-returners. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the non-returners, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the attributes of the non-returners. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the arhats, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the attributes of the arhats. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the pratyekabuddhas, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas. Because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the bodhisattvas, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the attributes of the bodhisattvas. And because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the buddhas, and because of utter purity they see the nonarising of the attributes of the buddhas.”
Venerable Śāradvatīputra then said to Venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, as I understand the meaning of your words, physical forms are nonarising, feelings are nonarising, perceptions are nonarising, formative predispositions are nonarising, and consciousness is nonarising. 
“The eyes are nonarising, the ears are nonarising, the nose is nonarising, the tongue is nonarising, the body is nonarising, and the mental faculty is nonarising; sights are nonarising, sounds are nonarising, odors are nonarising, tastes are nonarising, tangibles are nonarising, and mental phenomena are nonarising; visual consciousness is nonarising, auditory consciousness is nonarising, olfactory consciousness is nonarising, gustatory consciousness is nonarising, tactile consciousness is nonarising, and mental consciousness is nonarising; visually compounded sensory contact is nonarising, aurally compounded sensory contact is nonarising, nasally compounded sensory contact is nonarising, lingually compounded sensory contact is nonarising, corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonarising, and mentally compounded sensory contact is nonarising; and feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonarising, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonarising, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonarising, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonarising, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonarising, and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonarising.
“The earth element is nonarising, the water element is nonarising, the fire element is nonarising, the wind element is nonarising, the space element is nonarising, and the consciousness element is nonarising.
“Ignorance is nonarising, formative predispositions are nonarising, consciousness is nonarising, name and form are nonarising, the six sense fields are nonarising, sensory contact is nonarising, sensation is nonarising, craving is nonarising, grasping is nonarising, the rebirth process is nonarising, birth is nonarising, and aging and death are nonarising. 
“The perfection of generosity is nonarising, the perfection of ethical discipline is nonarising, the perfection of tolerance is nonarising, the perfection of perseverance is nonarising, the perfection of meditative concentration is nonarising, and the perfection of wisdom is nonarising.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of external phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of emptiness is nonarising, the emptiness of great extent is nonarising, the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonarising, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of the unlimited is nonarising, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonarising, the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonarising, the emptiness of inherent nature is nonarising, the emptiness of all phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonarising, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonarising, the emptiness of nonentities is nonarising, the emptiness of essential nature is nonarising, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonarising.
“The applications of mindfulness are nonarising, the correct exertions are nonarising, the supports for miraculous ability are nonarising, the faculties are nonarising, the powers are nonarising, the branches of enlightenment are nonarising, and the noble eightfold path is nonarising. 
“The truths of the noble ones are nonarising, the four meditative concentrations are nonarising, the four immeasurable attitudes are nonarising, the four formless absorptions are nonarising, the eight liberations are nonarising, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are nonarising, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonarising, the extrasensory powers are nonarising, the meditative stabilities are nonarising, the dhāraṇī gateways are nonarising, the ten powers of the tathāgatas are nonarising, the four fearlessnesses are nonarising, the four kinds of exact knowledge are nonarising, great loving kindness is nonarising, great compassion is nonarising, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonarising.
“knowledge of all the dharmas is nonarising, the knowledge of the aspects of the path is nonarising, and all-aspect omniscience is nonarising. 
“Ordinary persons are nonarising, and the attributes of ordinary persons are nonarising; those who have entered the stream are nonarising, and the attributes of those who have entered the stream are nonarising; the once-returners are nonarising, and the attributes of the once-returners are nonarising; the non-returners are nonarising, and the attributes of the non-returners are nonarising; the arhats are nonarising, and the attributes of the arhats are nonarising; the pratyekabuddhas are nonarising, and the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas are nonarising; the bodhisattvas are nonarising, and the attributes of the bodhisattvas are nonarising; and the buddhas are nonarising, and the attributes of the buddhas are nonarising.
“If that is so, Venerable Subhūti—if physical forms do not arise, feelings do not arise, perceptions do not arise, formative predispositions do not arise, and consciousness does not arise; the eyes do not arise, the ears do not arise, the nose does not arise, the tongue does not arise, the body does not arise, and the mental faculty does not arise; sights do not arise, sounds do not arise, odors do not arise, tastes do not arise, tangibles do not arise, and mental phenomena do not arise; visual consciousness does not arise, auditory consciousness does not arise, olfactory consciousness does not arise, gustatory consciousness does not arise, tactile consciousness does not arise, and mental consciousness does not arise; visually compounded sensory contact does not arise, aurally compounded sensory contact does not arise, nasally compounded sensory contact does not arise, lingually compounded sensory contact does not arise, corporeally compounded sensory contact does not arise, and mentally compounded sensory contact does not arise; feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact do not arise, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact do not arise, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact do not arise, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact do not arise, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact do not arise, and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact do not arise; the earth element does not arise, the water element does not arise, the fire element does not arise, the wind element does not arise, the space element does not arise, and the consciousness element does not arise; ignorance does not arise, formative predispositions do not arise, consciousness does not arise, name and form do not arise, the six sense fields do not arise, sensory contact does not arise, sensation does not arise, craving does not arise, grasping does not arise, the rebirth process does not arise, birth does not arise, and aging and death do not arise; the perfection of generosity does not arise, the perfection of ethical discipline does not arise, the perfection of tolerance does not arise, the perfection of perseverance does not arise, the perfection of meditative concentration does not arise, and the perfection of wisdom does not arise; the emptiness of internal phenomena does not arise, the emptiness of external phenomena does not arise, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena does not arise, the emptiness of emptiness does not arise, the emptiness of great extent does not arise, the emptiness of ultimate reality does not arise, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena does not arise, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena does not arise, the emptiness of the unlimited does not arise, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end does not arise, the emptiness of nonexclusion does not arise, the emptiness of inherent nature does not arise, the emptiness of all phenomena does not arise, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics does not arise, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended does not arise, the emptiness of nonentities does not arise, the emptiness of essential nature does not arise, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities does not arise; the applications of mindfulness do not arise, the correct exertions do not arise, the supports for miraculous ability do not arise, the faculties do not arise, the powers do not arise, the branches of enlightenment do not arise, and the noble eightfold path does not arise; the truths of the noble ones do not arise, the meditative concentrations do not arise, the immeasurable attitudes do not arise, the formless absorptions do not arise, the eight liberations do not arise, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption do not arise, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation do not arise, the extrasensory powers do not arise, the meditative stabilities do not arise, the dhāraṇī gateways do not arise, the ten powers of the tathāgatas do not arise, the four fearlessnesses do not arise, the four kinds of exact knowledge do not arise, great loving kindness does not arise, great compassion does not arise, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas do not arise; knowledge of all the dharmas does not arise, the knowledge of the aspects of the path does not arise, and all-aspect omniscience does not arise; ordinary persons do not arise and the attributes of ordinary persons do not arise; those who have entered the stream do not arise and the attributes of those who have entered the stream do not arise; the once-returners do not arise and the attributes of the once-returners do not arise; the non-returners do not arise and the attributes of the once-returners do not arise; the arhats do not arise and the attributes of the arhats do not arise; the pratyekabuddhas do not arise and the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas do not arise; the bodhisattvas do not arise and the attributes of the bodhisattvas do not arise; and the buddhas do not arise and the attributes of the buddhas do not arise—then indeed those in the vehicle of the śrāvakas would have already attained the fruit of having entered the stream, the fruit of once-returner, the fruit of non-returner, and arhatship. Those in the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, too, would have already attained their individual enlightenment, and the bodhisattva great beings would have already attained all-aspect omniscience. The five classes of beings would not be differentiated. And bodhisattva great beings would have already attained the fivefold enlightenment.
“Venerable Subhūti, if all phenomena are nonarising, why should those who have entered the stream cultivate the path in order to abandon the three fetters? Why should the once-returners cultivate the path in order to attenuate desire, hatred, and delusion? Why should the non-returners cultivate the path in order to abandon the five fetters associated with the inferior? Why should arhats cultivate the path in order to abandon the five fetters associated with the superior? Why should followers of the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas cultivate the path for the sake of individual enlightenment? Why should bodhisattva great beings undergo sufferings and practice the difficult practices for the sake of beings? Why should the tathāgatas fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment? Why should the tathāgatas turn the wheel of the Dharma?”
Venerable Subhūti then said to Venerable Śāradvatīputra, “Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that a nonarising phenomenon has an attainment, or a realization. I do not hold that in nonarising there are those who have entered the stream, nor do I hold that there is the fruit of having entered the stream. I do not hold that in nonarising there are once-returners, nor do I hold that there is the fruit of once-returners. I do not hold that in nonarising there are non-returners, nor do I hold that there is the fruit of non-returners. I do not hold that in nonarising there are arhats, nor do I hold that there is arhatship. I do not hold that in nonarising there are pratyekabuddhas, nor do I hold that there is individual enlightenment. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not accept that bodhisattvas are undertaking difficult practices, or that bodhisattva great beings practice with the idea of difficulty. And why? Because it is not possible, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for bodhisattva great beings who entertain the idea of difficulty to work for the welfare of infinite, countless beings. Rather, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is by developing the perception that they are their father, developing the perception that they are their mother, developing the perception that they are their child, and developing the perception that they are themselves that they can work for the welfare of infinite, countless beings. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattva great beings must produce this thought: ‘Just as “the self, the self” is said but is nonexistent and cannot be apprehended at all in any way at all, I must produce that thought in just such a way about all inner and outer phenomena as well.’
“If they produce such an idea, the idea of difficulty does not arise. And why? Because bodhisattva great beings do not appropriate and do not apprehend any phenomenon as anything at all in any way at all. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that in nonarising there are tathāgatas, nor do I hold that there is unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment. There is no attainment or being attained by a nonarising phenomenon in accordance with the tathāgatas having turned the wheel of the Dharma.”
Śāradvatīputra then asked, “Venerable Subhūti, do you hold that a nonarising attainment is attained by an arising phenomenon, or do you hold that an arising attainment is attained by a nonarising phenomenon?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “I do not hold that a nonarising attainment is being attained by an arising phenomenon, nor do I hold that an arising attainment is attained by a nonarising phenomenon.”
“Well then, Venerable Subhūti, is there no attainment? Is there no clear realization?” asked Śāradvatīputra.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “there is indeed an attainment and there is a clear realization, but not as those two. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, an attainment or a clear realization is designated by worldly convention. Those who have entered the stream, or once-returners, or non-returners, or arhats, or pratyekabuddhas, or bodhisattvas, or buddhas are also designated by worldly convention. Ultimately, however, an attainment, or a clear realization, or those who have entered the stream, or once-returners, or non-returners, or arhats, or pratyekabuddhas, or bodhisattvas, or buddhas are not designated.” 
“Venerable Subhūti, just as an attainment and a clear realization exist as worldly conventions, similarly, are the five classes of beings also different as worldly conventions, but not ultimately?” asked Śāradvatīputra.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that is so!” replied Subhūti. “Just as attainment and clear realization exist as worldly conventions, similarly, the five classes of beings also are differentiated as worldly conventions, but not ultimately. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because, ultimately, there is no action and no maturation of an action, no arising and no ceasing, and no defilement and no purification.” 
“Venerable Subhūti, does a phenomenon that has not arisen arise, or does a phenomenon that has arisen arise?” asked Śāradvatīputra.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “I do not hold that phenomena that have not arisen arise, nor do I hold that phenomena that have arisen arise.”
“Venerable Subhūti, what phenomena that have not arisen do you hold not to arise?” asked Śāradvatīputra. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “I do not hold that physical forms that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that perceptions that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that formative predispositions that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that consciousness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the eyes that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the ears that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the nose that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the tongue that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the body that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the mental faculty that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that sights that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that sounds that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that odors that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that tastes that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that tangibles that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that mental phenomena that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that visual consciousness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that auditory consciousness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that olfactory consciousness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that gustatory consciousness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that tactile consciousness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that mental consciousness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that visually compounded sensory contact that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that aurally compounded sensory contact that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that nasally compounded sensory contact that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that lingually compounded sensory contact that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that corporeally compounded sensory contact that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that mentally compounded sensory contact that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold the earth element that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the water element that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fire element that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the wind element that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the space element that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the consciousness element that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that ignorance that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that formative predispositions that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that consciousness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that name and form that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the six sense fields that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that sensory contact that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that sensation that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that craving that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that grasping that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the rebirth process that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that birth that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that aging and death that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of generosity that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of ethical discipline that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of tolerance that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of perseverance that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of meditative concentration that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of wisdom that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of internal phenomena that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of external phenomena that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of emptiness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of great extent that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of ultimate reality that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of the unlimited that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of nonexclusion that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of inherent nature that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of all phenomena that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of nonentities that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of essential nature that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the applications of mindfulness that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the correct exertions that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the supports for miraculous ability that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the faculties that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the powers that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the branches of enlightenment that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the noble eightfold path that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the truths of the noble ones that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the meditative concentrations that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the immeasurable attitudes that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the formless absorptions that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the liberations that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the serial steps of meditative absorption that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the extrasensory powers that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the meditative stabilities that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the dhāraṇī gateways that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the powers of the tathāgatas that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fearlessnesses that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the kinds of exact knowledge that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that great loving kindness that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that great compassion that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the distinct qualities of the buddhas that have not arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fruit of having entered the stream that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fruit of once-returner that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fruit of non-returner that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that arhatship that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that individual enlightenment that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the knowledge of the aspects of the path that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that all-aspect omniscience that has not arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what phenomena that have arisen do you hold not to arise?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “I do not hold that physical forms that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that perceptions that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that formative predispositions that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that consciousness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the eyes that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the ears that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the nose that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the tongue that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the body that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the mental faculty that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that sights that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that sounds that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that odors that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that tastes that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that tangibles that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that mental phenomena that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that visual consciousness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that auditory consciousness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that olfactory consciousness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that gustatory consciousness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that tactile consciousness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that mental consciousness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that visually compounded sensory contact that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that aurally compounded sensory contact that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that nasally compounded sensory contact that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that lingually compounded sensory contact that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that corporeally compounded sensory contact that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that mentally compounded sensory contact that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold the earth element that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the water element that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fire element that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the wind element that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the space element that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the consciousness element that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that ignorance that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that formative predispositions that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that consciousness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that name and form that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the six sense fields that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that sensory contact that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that sensation that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that craving that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that grasping that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the rebirth process that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that birth that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that and aging and death that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of generosity that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of ethical discipline that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of tolerance that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of perseverance that has arisen, which is empty of essential existence, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the perfection of meditative concentration that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that and the perfection of wisdom that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of internal phenomena that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of external phenomena that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of external and internal phenomena that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of emptiness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of great extent that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of ultimate reality that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of conditioned phenomena that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of the unlimited that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of nonexclusion that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of inherent nature that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of all phenomena that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of nonentities that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of essential nature that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the applications of mindfulness that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the correct exertions that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the supports for miraculous ability that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the faculties that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the powers that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the branches of enlightenment that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the noble eightfold path that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the truths of the noble ones that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the meditative concentrations that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the immeasurable attitudes that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the formless absorptions that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the liberations that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the serial steps of meditative absorption that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the extrasensory powers that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the meditative stabilities that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the dhāraṇī gateways that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the powers of the tathāgatas that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fearlessnesses that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the kinds of exact knowledge that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that great loving kindness that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that great compassion that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the distinct qualities of the buddhas that have arisen, which are empty of essential nature, arise. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fruit of having entered the stream that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fruit of once-returner that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the fruit of non-returner that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that arhatship that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that individual enlightenment that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that the knowledge of the aspects of the path that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not hold that all-aspect omniscience that has arisen, which is empty of essential nature, arises.”
Venerable Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, does arising arise? Or else, does nonarising arise?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “arising does not arise, nor does nonarising arise. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because both phenomena that arise and phenomena that are nonarising are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics. For that reason, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, arising does not arise, nor does nonarising arise.”
Venerable Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, if you have the confidence that inspires you to say ‘phenomena that have not arisen, phenomena that have not arisen,’ well then, Venerable Subhūti, do you also have the confidence that inspires you to say there is no arising of phenomena that have not arisen?” 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “you say, ‘You have the confidence that inspires you to say “phenomena that have not arisen, phenomena that have not arisen.” ’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I do not have the confidence that inspires me to say ‘phenomena that have not arisen, phenomena that have not arisen.’ Venerable Śāradvatīputra, I also do not have the confidence that inspires me to say there is no arising of phenomena that have not arisen. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because all the phenomena––the phenomenon that has not arisen, the nonarising, the confidence that inspires speech, the sayings, and the failure to arise–– are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and are immaterial, impossible to indicate, unobstructed, and have only one defining characteristic, which is to say, they are without defining characteristics.” 
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, is a statement a nonarising, is a confidence that inspires the statement also a nonarising, and is a phenomenon also a nonarising? Are those phenomena about which there is a confidence that inspires speaking also a nonarising?” 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is so!” replied Subhūti. “The statement has not arisen. The confidence that inspires speaking has not arisen. The phenomenon has not arisen. Those phenomena about which there is a confidence that inspires speaking also have not arisen. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because physical forms are nonarising, feelings are nonarising, perceptions are nonarising, formative predispositions are nonarising, and consciousness is nonarising. 
“The eyes are nonarising, the ears are nonarising, the nose is nonarising, the tongue is nonarising, the body is nonarising, and the mental faculty is nonarising; sights are nonarising, sounds are nonarising, odors are nonarising, tastes are nonarising, tangibles are nonarising, and mental phenomena is nonarising; visual consciousness is nonarising, auditory consciousness is nonarising, olfactory consciousness is nonarising, gustatory consciousness is nonarising, tactile consciousness is nonarising, and mental consciousness is nonarising; visually compounded sensory contact is nonarising, aurally compounded sensory contact is nonarising, nasally compounded sensory contact is nonarising, lingually compounded sensory contact is nonarising, corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonarising, and mentally compounded sensory contact is nonarising; and feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonarising, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonarising, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonarising, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonarising, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonarising, and feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonarising.
“The earth element is nonarising, the water element is nonarising, the fire element is nonarising, the wind element is nonarising, the space element is nonarising, and the consciousness element is nonarising.
“Ignorance is nonarising, formative predispositions are nonarising, consciousness is nonarising, name and form are nonarising, the six sense fields are nonarising, sensory contact is nonarising, sensation is nonarising, craving is nonarising, grasping is nonarising, the rebirth process is nonarising, birth is nonarising, and aging and death are nonarising. 
“The perfection of generosity is nonarising, the perfection of ethical discipline is nonarising, the perfection of tolerance is nonarising, the perfection of perseverance is nonarising, the perfection of meditative concentration is nonarising, and the perfection of wisdom is nonarising.
“The emptiness of internal phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of external phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of emptiness is nonarising, the emptiness of great extent is nonarising, the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonarising, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of the unlimited is nonarising, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonarising, the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonarising, the emptiness of inherent nature is nonarising, the emptiness of all phenomena is nonarising, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonarising, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonarising, the emptiness of nonentities is nonarising, the emptiness of essential nature is nonarising, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonarising.
“The applications of mindfulness are nonarising, the correct exertions are nonarising, the supports for miraculous ability are nonarising, the faculties are nonarising, the powers are nonarising, the branches of enlightenment are nonarising, and the noble eightfold path is nonarising. 
“The truths of the noble ones are nonarising, the meditative concentrations are nonarising, the immeasurable attitudes are nonarising, the formless absorptions are nonarising, the liberations are nonarising, the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonarising, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are nonarising, the extrasensory powers are nonarising, the meditative stabilities are nonarising, the dhāraṇī gateways are nonarising, the powers of the tathāgatas are nonarising, the fearlessnesses are nonarising, the kinds of exact knowledge are nonarising, great loving kindness is nonarising, great compassion is nonarising, and the distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonarising.
“And the fruit of having entered the stream is nonarising, the fruit of once-returner is nonarising, the fruit of non-returner is nonarising, arhatship is nonarising, individual enlightenment is nonarising, the knowledge of the aspects of the path is nonarising, and all-aspect omniscience is nonarising.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for this reason the statement is nonarising, the confidence that inspires speaking is nonarising, and the phenomenon is nonarising. Those phenomena about which there is a confidence that inspires speaking are also nonarisings.”
Śāradvatīputra said, “Venerable Subhūti, you should rightly be established as supreme among those who teach the Dharma! If you ask why, it is because however the elder Subhūti is questioned, he is not impeded by it.” 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “it is the reality of things that however those śrāvakas of the Blessed One, who have not taken any phenomenon as a support, are questioned, they are not impeded by it. If you ask why, it is because all phenomena are without any support.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, how is it that all phenomena are without any support?” 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “physical forms are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, perceptions are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, formative predispositions are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, consciousness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eyes are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the ears are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the nose is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the tongue is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the body is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the mental faculty is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sights are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sounds are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, odors are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tastes are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tangibles are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mental phenomena are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visual consciousness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, auditory consciousness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, olfactory consciousness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, gustatory consciousness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, tactile consciousness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mental consciousness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, visually compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, aurally compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, nasally compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, lingually compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, corporeally compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, mentally compounded sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the earth element is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the water element is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fire element is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the wind element is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the space element is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the consciousness element is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, ignorance is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, formative predispositions are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, consciousness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, name and form are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the six sense fields are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sensory contact is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, sensation is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, craving is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, grasping is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the rebirth process is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, birth is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, aging and death are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of generosity is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of ethical discipline is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of tolerance is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of perseverance is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of meditative concentration is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of wisdom is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of external phenomena is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of emptiness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of great extent is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of ultimate reality is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of the unlimited is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of nonexclusion is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of inherent nature is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of all phenomena is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of nonentities is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of essential nature is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the applications of mindfulness are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the correct exertions are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the supports for miraculous ability are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the faculties are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the powers are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the branches of enlightenment are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the noble eightfold path is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the truths of the noble ones are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the meditative concentrations are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the immeasurable attitudes are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the formless absorptions are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the liberations are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the serial steps of meditative absorption are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the extrasensory powers are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the meditative stabilities are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the dhāraṇī gateways are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the powers of the tathāgatas are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fearlessnesses are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the kinds of exact knowledge are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, great loving kindness is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, great compassion is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the distinct qualities of the buddhas are empty of an inherent nature, so they have no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and they cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fruit of having entered the stream is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fruit of once-returner is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the fruit of non-returner is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, arhatship is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, individual enlightenment is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the knowledge of the aspects of the path is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all-aspect omniscience is empty of an inherent nature, so it has no support in internal phenomena, no support in external phenomena, and it cannot be apprehended in the absence of both.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that is the reason that all phenomena have no supports because they are empty of an inherent nature. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattva great beings who practice the six perfections should refine physical forms in that manner; they should refine feelings, should refine perceptions, should refine formative predispositions, and should refine consciousness; they should refine the eyes, should refine the ears, should refine the nose, should refine the tongue, should refine the body, and should refine the mental faculty; they should refine sights, should refine sounds, should refine odors, should refine tastes, should refine tangibles, and should refine mental phenomena; they should refine visual consciousness, should refine auditory consciousness, should refine olfactory consciousness, should refine gustatory consciousness, should refine tactile consciousness, and should refine mental consciousness; they should refine visually compounded sensory contact, should refine aurally compounded sensory contact, should refine nasally compounded sensory contact, should refine lingually compounded sensory contact, should refine corporeally compounded sensory contact, and should refine mentally compounded sensory contact; they should refine feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, should refine feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, should refine feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, should refine feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, should refine feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, and should refine feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact; they should refine the earth element, should refine the water element, should refine the fire element, should refine the wind element, should refine the space element, and should refine the consciousness element; they should refine ignorance, should refine formative predispositions, should refine consciousness, should refine name and form, should refine the six sense fields, should refine sensory contact, should refine sensation, should refine craving, should refine grasping, should refine the rebirth process, should refine birth, and should refine aging and death; they should refine the perfection of generosity, should refine the perfection of ethical discipline, should refine the perfection of tolerance, should refine the perfection of perseverance, should refine the perfection of meditative concentration, and should refine the perfection of wisdom; they should refine the emptiness of internal phenomena, should refine the emptiness of external phenomena, should refine the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, should refine the emptiness of emptiness, should refine the emptiness of great extent, should refine the emptiness of ultimate reality, should refine the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, should refine the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, should refine the emptiness of the unlimited, should refine the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, should refine the emptiness of nonexclusion, should refine the emptiness of inherent nature, should refine the emptiness of all phenomena, should refine the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, should refine the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, should refine the emptiness of nonentities, should refine the emptiness of essential nature, and should refine the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities; they should refine the applications of mindfulness, should refine the correct exertions, should refine the supports for miraculous ability, should refine the faculties, should refine the powers, should refine the branches of enlightenment, and should refine the noble eightfold path; they should refine the truths of the noble ones, should refine the meditative concentrations, should refine the immeasurable attitudes, should refine the formless absorptions, should refine the liberations, should refine the serial steps of meditative absorption, should refine the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation, should refine the extrasensory powers, should refine the meditative stabilities, should refine the dhāraṇī gateways, should refine the powers of the tathāgatas, should refine the fearlessnesses, should refine the kinds of exact knowledge, should refine great loving kindness, should refine great compassion, and should refine the distinct qualities of the buddhas; and they should refine knowledge of all the dharmas, should refine the knowledge of the aspects of the path, and they should refine all-aspect omniscience.”
Venerable Śāradvatīputra then asked Venerable Subhūti, “Venerable Subhūti, when bodhisattva great beings practice the six perfections, how do they refine the path to enlightenment?” 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “the perfection of generosity is mundane and it is supramundane. The perfection of ethical discipline is mundane and is supramundane. The perfection of tolerance is mundane and is supramundane. The perfection of perseverance is mundane and is supramundane. The perfection of meditative concentration is mundane and is supramundane. And the perfection of wisdom is mundane and is supramundane.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what is the mundane perfection of generosity? What is the supramundane perfection of generosity?” 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “here bodhisattva great beings are givers and, having become liberal donors, they offer food to virtuous ascetics, brahmin priests, the destitute, the starving, travelers, and beggars who are in need of food. They offer drink to those in need of drink, vehicles to those in need of vehicles, clothing to those in need of clothing, flowers to those in need of flowers, garlands to those in need of garlands, incense to those in need of incense, unguents to those in need of unguents, lodgings to those in need of lodgings, bedding and mats to those in need of bedding and mats, resources to those in need of resources, medications to those in need of medications, up to they offer whatever other resources humans might need. They offer a son to those in need of a son. They offer a daughter to those in need of a daughter. They offer a wife to those in need of a wife. They offer a kingdom to those in need of a kingdom. They offer their head to those in need of a head. They offer a limb and a vital organ to those in need of a limb and a vital organ. They offer flesh, blood, and marrow to those in need of flesh, blood, and marrow. While taking things as a support, they practice liberality, thinking, ‘I am giving. They are receiving. This is generosity. I am without miserliness. I am a liberal donor. I give away everything. I am doing as the lord buddhas command. I am practicing the perfection of generosity.’ Having given these gifts, making common cause with all beings, by way of apprehending something they dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment, dedicating with the thought, ‘Through this fruit of my gift may these beings in this very lifetime become happy and, without having appropriated anything, attain the final nirvāṇa.’ 
“They give gifts while attached by three attachments. If you ask what these three are, they are the perception of self, the perception of others, and the perception of giving. Attached by these three attachments they give gifts. 
“This is called the mundane perfection of generosity. If you ask why it is called the mundane perfection of generosity, it is because it does not move beyond, is not superior to, and does not transcend the mundane. Therefore it is called the mundane perfection of generosity.
“If you ask what, between them, is the supramundane perfection of generosity, it is so called because of the purity of the three spheres. If you ask what the purity of the three spheres is, here, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, when bodhisattva great beings offer gifts, they do not apprehend a self, they do not apprehend a recipient, they do not apprehend giving, and they do not delight in the maturation. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, this is the purity of the three spheres of bodhisattva great beings. 
“Moreover, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, bodhisattva great beings giving gifts bestow the giving on all beings, but they do not apprehend those beings. They dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment without observing even the slightest mental image. This, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, is called the ‘supramundane perfection of generosity.’ If you ask why it is called the mundane perfection of generosity, it is because it moves beyond, is superior to, and transcends the mundane. Therefore it is called the supramundane perfection of generosity.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of ethical discipline is mundane and is supramundane. If you ask what, between them, is the mundane perfection of ethical discipline, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, here bodhisattva great beings maintain ethical discipline, maintaining it while taking things as a support, thinking, ‘I maintain ethical discipline for the sake of all beings. This is ethical discipline. I am doing as the lord buddhas command.’ Maintaining ethical discipline in this manner, making common cause with all beings, by way of apprehending something they dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment, dedicating with the thought, ‘Through this fruit of my ethical discipline may these beings in this very lifetime become happy and, without having appropriated anything, attain the final nirvāṇa.’ 
“They maintain ethical discipline while attached by the three attachments of the perception of self, the perception of others, and the perception of ethical discipline. This is called the mundane perfection of ethical discipline. If you ask why it is called the mundane perfection of ethical discipline, it is because it does not move beyond, is not superior to, and does not transcend the mundane. Therefore it is called mundane.
“If you ask what, between them, is the supramundane perfection of ethical discipline, it is so called because of the purity of the three spheres. If you ask what the purity of the three spheres is, here, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, when bodhisattva great beings maintain ethical discipline, they do not apprehend a self, they do not apprehend beings, they do not apprehend ethical discipline, and they do not delight in the maturation. Moreover, bodhisattva great beings bestow ethical discipline on all beings, but they do not apprehend those beings. They dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment without observing even the slightest mental image. This, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, is called the supramundane perfection of ethical discipline because it moves beyond, is superior to, and transcends the mundane. Therefore it is called supramundane.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of tolerance is mundane and is supramundane. If you ask what, between them, is the mundane perfection of tolerance, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, here bodhisattva great beings cultivate tolerance, cultivating it while taking things as a support, thinking, ‘I cultivate tolerance for the sake of all beings. This is tolerance. I am doing as the lord buddhas command.’ Making common cause with all beings, by way of apprehending that tolerance, they dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment, dedicating with the thought, ‘Through this fruit of my tolerance may these beings in this very lifetime become happy and, without having appropriated anything, attain the final nirvāṇa.’ 
“They cultivate tolerance while attached by the three attachments of the perception of self, the perception of others, and the perception of tolerance. This is called the mundane perfection of tolerance because it does not move beyond, is not superior to, and does not transcend the mundane. Therefore it is called mundane.
“If you ask what, between them, is the supramundane perfection of tolerance, it is so called because of the purity of the three spheres. If you ask what the purity of the three spheres is, here, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, when bodhisattva great beings cultivate tolerance, they do not apprehend a self, they do not apprehend beings, they do not apprehend tolerance, and they do not delight in the maturation. Moreover, bodhisattva great beings bestow tolerance on all beings, but they do not apprehend those beings. They dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment without observing even the slightest mental image. This is the supramundane perfection of tolerance because it moves beyond, is superior to, and transcends the mundane. Therefore it is called supramundane.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of perseverance is mundane and is supramundane. If you ask what, between them, is the mundane perfection of perseverance, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, here bodhisattva great beings undertake perseverance, undertaking it while taking things as a support, thinking, ‘I undertake perseverance for the sake of all beings. This is the body. This is the mind. This is perseverance. I am doing as the lord buddhas command. I am practicing the perfection of perseverance.’ Making common cause with all beings, by way of apprehending that perseverance, they dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment, dedicating with the thought, ‘Through this fruit of my perseverance may these beings in this very lifetime become happy and, without having appropriated anything, attain the final nirvāṇa.’ 
“They undertake perseverance while attached by the three attachments of the perception of self, the perception of others, and the perception of perseverance. This is called the mundane perfection of perseverance because it does not move beyond, is not superior to, and does not transcend the mundane. Therefore it is called mundane.
“If you ask what, between them, is the supramundane perfection of perseverance, it is so called because of the purity of the three spheres. If you ask what the purity of the three spheres is, here, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, when bodhisattva great beings undertake perseverance, they do not apprehend a self, they do not apprehend beings, they do not apprehend perseverance, and they do not delight in the maturation. Moreover, bodhisattva great beings bestow perseverance on all beings, but they do not apprehend those beings. They dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment without observing even the slightest mental image. This is called the supramundane perfection of perseverance because it moves beyond, is superior to, and transcends the mundane. Therefore it is called supramundane.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of meditative concentration is mundane and is supramundane. If you ask what, between them, is the mundane perfection of meditative concentration, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, here bodhisattva great beings enter into absorption in meditative concentration, entering into absorption while taking things as a support, thinking, ‘I enter into absorption in meditative concentration for the sake of all beings. This is meditative concentration. I am doing as the lord buddhas command.’ Making common cause with all beings, by way of apprehending entry into absorption in that meditative concentration, they dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment, dedicating with the thought, ‘Through this fruit of my meditative concentration may these beings in this very lifetime become happy and, without having appropriated anything, attain the final nirvāṇa.’ 
“They enter into absorption in meditative concentration while attached by the three attachments of the perception of self, the perception of others, and the perception of meditative concentration. This is called the mundane perfection of perseverance because it does not move beyond, is not superior to, and does not transcend the mundane. Therefore it is called mundane.
“If you ask what, between them, is the supramundane perfection of perseverance, it is so called because of the purity of the three spheres. If you ask what the purity of the three spheres is, here, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, when bodhisattva great beings enter into absorption in meditative concentration, they do not apprehend a self, they do not apprehend beings, they do not apprehend meditative concentration, and they do not delight in the maturation. Moreover, bodhisattva great beings bestow meditative concentration on all beings, but they do not apprehend those beings. They dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment without observing even the slightest mental image. This is called the supramundane perfection of meditative concentration because it moves beyond, is superior to, and transcends the mundane. Therefore it is called supramundane.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of wisdom is mundane and is supramundane. If you ask what, between them, is the mundane perfection of wisdom, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, here bodhisattva great beings cultivate wisdom, cultivating it while taking things as a support. By way of apprehending something, for the sake of self and others they confess all wrongdoing, rejoice in all merits, and request all the buddhas to teach. Without skillful means they dedicate all those roots of virtue to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment, thinking, ‘I cultivate wisdom for the sake of all beings. This is wisdom. I am doing as the lord buddhas command.’ Making common cause with all beings, by way of apprehending that cultivation of wisdom, they dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment, dedicating with the thought, ‘Through this fruit of my wisdom may these beings in this very lifetime become happy and, without having appropriated anything, attain the final nirvāṇa.’ 
“They cultivate wisdom while attached by the three attachments of the perception of self, the perception of others, and the perception of wisdom. This is called the mundane perfection of wisdom because it does not move beyond, is not superior to, and does not transcend the mundane. Therefore it is called mundane.
“If you ask what, among them, is the supramundane perfection of wisdom, it is so called because of the purity of the three spheres. If you ask what the purity of the three spheres is, here, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, when bodhisattva great beings cultivate wisdom, they do not apprehend a self, they do not apprehend beings, they do not apprehend wisdom, and they do not delight in the maturation. Moreover, bodhisattva great beings bestow wisdom on all beings, but they do not apprehend those beings. They dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment without observing even the slightest mental image. This is called the supramundane perfection of wisdom because it moves beyond, is superior to, and transcends the mundane. Therefore it is called the supramundane perfection of wisdom.
“So it is, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, that bodhisattva great beings practice the six perfections and refine the path to enlightenment.”
Śāradvatīputra asked, “Venerable Subhūti, what is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “the perfection of generosity is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the perfection of ethical discipline is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the perfection of tolerance is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the perfection of perseverance is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the perfection of meditative concentration is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, and the perfection of wisdom is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the emptiness of internal phenomena is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of external phenomena is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of emptiness is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of great extent is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of ultimate reality is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of the unlimited is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of nonexclusion is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of inherent nature is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of all phenomena is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of nonentities is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness of essential nature is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, and the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the four applications of mindfulness are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the four correct exertions are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the four supports for miraculous ability are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the five faculties are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the five powers are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the seven branches of enlightenment are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the four truths of the noble ones are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the four meditative concentrations are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the four immeasurable attitudes are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the four formless absorptions are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the eight liberations are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness gateways to liberation are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the five extrasensory powers are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, all the meditative stabilities are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, all the dhāraṇī gateways are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the ten powers of the tathāgatas are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the four fearlessnesses are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, the four kinds of exact knowledge are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, great loving kindness is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, great compassion is the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment, and, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are the bodhisattva great beings’ path to enlightenment.”
“Excellent, excellent, Subhūti!” said Śāradvatīputra. “Of which perfection is this the power?”
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra,” replied Subhūti, “this is the power of the perfection of wisdom. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because the perfection of wisdom is the generator of all virtuous attributes—the attributes of the śrāvakas, the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas, the attributes of the bodhisattvas, and the attributes of the buddhas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the perfection of wisdom is the one that fully incorporates and perfectly incorporates all virtuous attributes—the attributes of the śrāvakas, the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas, the attributes of the bodhisattvas, and the attributes of the buddhas. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas of the past fully awakened to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment having practiced just this perfection of wisdom. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas of the future will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment having practiced just this perfection of wisdom. And, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, all the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas who are residing and maintaining themselves at the present time, in the world systems of the ten directions, are also fully awakening to unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment having practiced just this perfection of wisdom.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, if, when this perfection of wisdom is explained, bodhisattva great beings do not become unsure and do not become perplexed, then, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that these bodhisattva great beings, without apprehending anything, thus practice this practice in order to offer sanctuary to all beings and in order not to forsake any beings, and one should know that these bodhisattva great beings are inseparable from the attention that pays attention to great compassion.”
Śāradvatīputra said, “Venerable Subhūti, if you hold that those who practice this practice—that is to say, those who are inseparable from the attention that pays attention to great compassion—are bodhisattva great beings, in that case, Venerable Subhūti, all beings would be bodhisattvas. If you ask why, Venerable Subhūti, it is because all beings are inseparable from attention.”
“Excellent, excellent, Venerable Śāradvatīputra!” replied Subhūti. “Venerable Śāradvatīputra, just that reality you had in mind when you thought, ‘I will question this, I will question this,’ you have expressed in a true statement and have fully grasped. If you ask why, Venerable Śāradvatīputra, it is because one should know that that attention is nonexistent because beings are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because beings are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because beings are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of beings, one should know that that attention is void because beings are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because beings will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because physical forms are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because physical forms are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because physical forms are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of physical forms, one should know that that attention is void because physical forms are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because physical forms will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because feelings are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because feelings are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because feelings are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of feelings, one should know that that attention is void because feelings are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because feelings will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because perceptions are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because perceptions are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because perceptions are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of perceptions, one should know that that attention is void because perceptions are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because perceptions will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because formative predispositions are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because formative predispositions are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because formative predispositions are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of formative predispositions, one should know that that attention is void because formative predispositions are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because formative predispositions will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because consciousness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because consciousness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because consciousness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of consciousness, one should know that that attention is void because consciousness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because consciousness will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the eyes are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the eyes are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the eyes are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the eyes, one should know that that attention is void because the eyes are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the eyes will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the ears are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the ears are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the ears are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the ears, one should know that that attention is void because the ears are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the ears will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the nose is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the nose is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the nose is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the nose, one should know that that attention is void because the nose is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the nose will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the tongue is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the tongue is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the tongue is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the tongue, one should know that that attention is void because the tongue is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the tongue will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the body is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the body is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the body is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the body, one should know that that attention is void because the body is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the body will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the mental faculty is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the mental faculty is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the mental faculty is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the mental faculty, one should know that that attention is void because the mental faculty is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the mental faculty will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because sights are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because sights are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because sights are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of sights, one should know that that attention is void because sights are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because sights will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because sounds are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because sounds are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because sounds are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of sounds, one should know that that attention is void because sounds are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because sounds will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because odors are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because odors are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because odors are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of odors, one should know that that attention is void because odors are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because odors will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because tastes are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because tastes are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because tastes are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of tastes, one should know that that attention is void because tastes are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because tastes will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because tangibles are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because tangibles are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because tangibles are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of tangibles, one should know that that attention is void because tangibles are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because tangibles will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because mental phenomena are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because mental phenomena are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because mental phenomena are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of mental phenomena, one should know that that attention is void because mental phenomena are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because mental phenomena will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because visual consciousness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because visual consciousness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because visual consciousness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of visual consciousness, one should know that that attention is void because visual consciousness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because visual consciousness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because auditory consciousness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because auditory consciousness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because auditory consciousness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of auditory consciousness, one should know that that attention is void because auditory consciousness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because auditory consciousness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because olfactory consciousness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because olfactory consciousness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because olfactory consciousness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of olfactory consciousness, one should know that that attention is void because olfactory consciousness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because olfactory consciousness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because gustatory consciousness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because gustatory consciousness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because gustatory consciousness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of gustatory consciousness, one should know that that attention is void because gustatory consciousness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because gustatory consciousness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because tactile consciousness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because tactile consciousness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because tactile consciousness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of tactile consciousness, one should know that that attention is void because tactile consciousness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because tactile consciousness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because mental consciousness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because mental consciousness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because mental consciousness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of mental consciousness, one should know that that attention is void because mental consciousness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because mental consciousness will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because visually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because visually compounded sensory contact is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because visually compounded sensory contact is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of visually compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because visually compounded sensory contact is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because visually compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because aurally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because aurally compounded sensory contact is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because aurally compounded sensory contact is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of aurally compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because aurally compounded sensory contact is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because aurally compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because nasally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because nasally compounded sensory contact is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because nasally compounded sensory contact is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of nasally compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because nasally compounded sensory contact is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because nasally compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because lingually compounded sensory contact is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because lingually compounded sensory contact is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because lingually compounded sensory contact is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of lingually compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because lingually compounded sensory contact is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because lingually compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because corporeally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because corporeally compounded sensory contact is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because corporeally compounded sensory contact is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of corporeally compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because corporeally compounded sensory contact is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because corporeally compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because mentally compounded sensory contact is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because mentally compounded sensory contact is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because mentally compounded sensory contact is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of mentally compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because mentally compounded sensory contact is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because mentally compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because feelings conditioned by visually compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because feelings conditioned by aurally compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because feelings conditioned by nasally compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because feelings conditioned by lingually compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because feelings conditioned by corporeally compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because feelings conditioned by mentally compounded sensory contact will not fully awaken. 
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the earth element is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the earth element is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the earth element is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the earth element, one should know that that attention is void because the earth element is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the earth element will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the water element is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the water element is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the water element is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the water element, one should know that that attention is void because the water element is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the water element will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the fire element is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the fire element is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the fire element is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the fire element, one should know that that attention is void because the fire element is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the fire element will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the wind element is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the wind element is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the wind element is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the wind element, one should know that that attention is void because the wind element is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the wind element will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the space element is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the space element is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the space element is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the space element, one should know that that attention is void because the space element is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the space element will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the consciousness element is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the consciousness element is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the consciousness element is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the consciousness element, one should know that that attention is void because the consciousness element is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the consciousness element will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because ignorance is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because ignorance is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because ignorance is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of ignorance, one should know that that attention is void because ignorance is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because ignorance will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because formative predispositions are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because formative predispositions are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because formative predispositions are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of formative predispositions, one should know that that attention is void because formative predispositions are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because formative predispositions will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because consciousness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because consciousness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because consciousness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of consciousness, one should know that that attention is void because consciousness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because consciousness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because name and form are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because name and form are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because name and form are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of name and form, one should know that that attention is void because name and form are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because name and form will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the six sense fields are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the six sense fields are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the six sense fields are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the six sense fields, one should know that that attention is void because the six sense fields are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the six sense fields will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because sensory contact is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because sensory contact is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because sensory contact is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of sensory contact, one should know that that attention is void because sensory contact is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because sensory contact will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because sensation is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because sensation is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because sensation is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of sensation, one should know that that attention is void because sensation is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because sensation will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because craving is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because craving is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because craving is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of craving, one should know that that attention is void because craving is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because craving will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because grasping is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because grasping is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because grasping is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of grasping, one should know that that attention is void because grasping is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because grasping will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the rebirth process is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the rebirth process is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the rebirth process is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the rebirth process, one should know that that attention is void because the rebirth process is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the rebirth process will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because birth is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because birth is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because birth is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of birth, one should know that that attention is void because birth is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because birth will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because aging and death are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because aging and death are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because aging and death are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of aging and death, one should know that that attention is void because aging and death are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because aging and death will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the perfection of generosity is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the perfection of generosity is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the perfection of generosity is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the perfection of generosity, one should know that that attention is void because the perfection of generosity is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the perfection of generosity will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the perfection of ethical discipline is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the perfection of ethical discipline is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the perfection of ethical discipline is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the perfection of ethical discipline, one should know that that attention is void because the perfection of ethical discipline is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the perfection of ethical discipline will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the perfection of tolerance is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the perfection of tolerance is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the perfection of tolerance is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the perfection of tolerance, one should know that that attention is void because the perfection of tolerance is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the perfection of tolerance will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the perfection of perseverance is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the perfection of perseverance is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the perfection of perseverance is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the perfection of perseverance, one should know that that attention is void because the perfection of perseverance is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the perfection of perseverance will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the perfection of meditative concentration is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the perfection of meditative concentration is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the perfection of meditative concentration is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the perfection of meditative concentration, one should know that that attention is void because the perfection of meditative concentration is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the perfection of meditative concentration will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the perfection of wisdom is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the perfection of wisdom is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the perfection of wisdom is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the perfection of wisdom, one should know that that attention is void because the perfection of wisdom is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the perfection of wisdom will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of internal phenomena is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of internal phenomena is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of internal phenomena is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of internal phenomena, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of internal phenomena is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of internal phenomena will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of external phenomena is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of external phenomena is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of external phenomena is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of external phenomena, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of external phenomena is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of external phenomena will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of external and internal phenomena, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of external and internal phenomena will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of emptiness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of emptiness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of emptiness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of emptiness, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of emptiness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of emptiness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of great extent is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of great extent is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of great extent is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of great extent, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of great extent is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of great extent will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of ultimate reality is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of ultimate reality is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of ultimate reality is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of ultimate reality, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of ultimate reality is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of ultimate reality will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of conditioned phenomena will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of the unlimited is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of the unlimited is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of the unlimited is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of the unlimited, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of the unlimited is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of the unlimited will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of nonexclusion is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of nonexclusion is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of nonexclusion is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of nonexclusion, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of nonexclusion is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of nonexclusion will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of inherent nature is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of inherent nature is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of inherent nature is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of inherent nature, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of inherent nature is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of inherent nature will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of all phenomena is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of all phenomena is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of all phenomena is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of all phenomena, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of all phenomena is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of all phenomena will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of that which cannot be apprehended will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of nonentities is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of nonentities is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of nonentities is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of nonentities, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of nonentities is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of nonentities will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of essential nature is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of essential nature is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of essential nature is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of essential nature, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of essential nature is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of essential nature will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities, one should know that that attention is void because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the emptiness of an essential nature of nonentities will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the applications of mindfulness are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the applications of mindfulness are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the applications of mindfulness are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the applications of mindfulness, one should know that that attention is void because the applications of mindfulness are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the applications of mindfulness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the correct exertions are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the correct exertions are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the correct exertions are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the correct exertions, one should know that that attention is void because the correct exertions are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the correct exertions will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the supports for miraculous ability are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the supports for miraculous ability are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the supports for miraculous ability are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the supports for miraculous ability, one should know that that attention is void because the supports for miraculous ability are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the supports for miraculous ability will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the faculties are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the faculties are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the faculties are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the faculties, one should know that that attention is void because the faculties are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the faculties will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the powers are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the powers are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the powers are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the powers, one should know that that attention is void because the powers are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the powers will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the noble eightfold path is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the noble eightfold path is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the noble eightfold path is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the noble eightfold path, one should know that that attention is void because the noble eightfold path is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the noble eightfold path will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the truths of the noble ones are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the truths of the noble ones are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the truths of the noble ones are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the truths of the noble ones, one should know that that attention is void because the truths of the noble ones are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the truths of the noble ones will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the meditative concentrations are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the meditative concentrations are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the meditative concentrations are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the meditative concentrations, one should know that that attention is void because the meditative concentrations are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the meditative concentrations will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the immeasurable attitudes are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the immeasurable attitudes are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the immeasurable attitudes are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the immeasurable attitudes, one should know that that attention is void because the immeasurable attitudes are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the immeasurable attitudes will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the formless absorptions are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the formless absorptions are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the formless absorptions are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the formless absorptions, one should know that that attention is void because the formless absorptions are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the formless absorptions will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the liberations are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the liberations are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the liberations are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the liberations, one should know that that attention is void because the liberations are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the liberations will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the serial steps of meditative absorption are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the serial steps of meditative absorption are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the serial steps of meditative absorption, one should know that that attention is void because the serial steps of meditative absorption are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the serial steps of meditative absorption will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because emptiness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because emptiness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because emptiness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of emptiness, one should know that that attention is void because emptiness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because emptiness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because signlessness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because signlessness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because signlessness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of signlessness, one should know that that attention is void because signlessness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because signlessness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because wishlessness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because wishlessness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because wishlessness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of wishlessness, one should know that that attention is void because wishlessness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because wishlessness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the extrasensory powers are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the extrasensory powers are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the extrasensory powers are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the extrasensory powers, one should know that that attention is void because the extrasensory powers are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the extrasensory powers will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the meditative stabilities are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the meditative stabilities are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the meditative stabilities are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the meditative stabilities, one should know that that attention is void because the meditative stabilities are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the meditative stabilities will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the dhāraṇī gateways are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the dhāraṇī gateways are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the dhāraṇī gateways are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the dhāraṇī gateways, one should know that that attention is void because the dhāraṇī gateways are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the dhāraṇī gateways will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the powers of the tathāgatas are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the powers of the tathāgatas are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the powers of the tathāgatas are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the powers of the tathāgatas, one should know that that attention is void because the powers of the tathāgatas are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the powers of the tathāgatas will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the fearlessnesses are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the fearlessnesses are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the fearlessnesses are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the fearlessnesses, one should know that that attention is void because the fearlessnesses are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the fearlessnesses will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the kinds of exact knowledge are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the kinds of exact knowledge are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the kinds of exact knowledge are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the kinds of exact knowledge, one should know that that attention is void because the kinds of exact knowledge are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the kinds of exact knowledge will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because great loving kindness is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because great loving kindness is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because great loving kindness is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of great loving kindness, one should know that that attention is void because great loving kindness is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because great loving kindness will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because great compassion is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because great compassion is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because great compassion is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of great compassion, one should know that that attention is void because great compassion is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because great compassion will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are nonentities, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the distinct qualities of the buddhas, one should know that that attention is void because the distinct qualities of the buddhas are void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the distinct qualities of the buddhas will not fully awaken.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because knowledge of all the dharmas is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because knowledge of all the dharmas is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because knowledge of all the dharmas is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of knowledge of all the dharmas, one should know that that attention is void because knowledge of all the dharmas is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because knowledge of all the dharmas will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because the knowledge of the aspects of the path is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because the knowledge of the aspects of the path is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because the knowledge of the aspects of the path is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of the knowledge of the aspects of the path, one should know that that attention is void because the knowledge of the aspects of the path is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because the knowledge of the aspects of the path will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because all-aspect omniscience is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because all-aspect omniscience is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because all-aspect omniscience is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of all-aspect omniscience, one should know that that attention is void because all-aspect omniscience is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because all-aspect omniscience will not fully awaken. Venerable Śāradvatīputra, one should know that that attention is nonexistent because enlightenment is nonexistent, one should know that that attention is a nonentity because enlightenment is a nonentity, one should know that that attention is without an essential nature because enlightenment is without an essential nature, one should know the emptiness of that attention because of the emptiness of enlightenment, one should know that that attention is void because enlightenment is void, and one should know that that attention will not cause full awakening because enlightenment will not fully awaken.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, for this reason one should know that bodhisattva great beings are indeed inseparable from paying attention to great compassion.”
The Blessed One then congratulated Venerable Subhūti: “Excellent, Subhūti, excellent. The perfection of wisdom should be taught to bodhisattva great beings just as you, Subhūti, through the mighty power of the tathāgatas, teach it. Bodhisattva great beings should indeed train in the perfection of wisdom, just as you teach it.” 
When Venerable Subhūti had spoken this chapter of the perfection of wisdom, this world system of the great trichiliocosm shook in six ways. That is to say, it shook, shuddered, and juddered. It rocked, reeled, and tottered. It quivered, careened, and convulsed. It trembled, throbbed, and quaked. It rumbled, roared, and thundered. It faltered, lurched, and staggered. As its eastern sides plunged down, its western sides reared up; as its eastern sides reared up, its western sides plunged down; as its northern sides plunged down, its southern sides reared up; as its northern sides reared up, its southern sides plunged down; as its center plunged down, its edges reared up; and as its edges plunged down, its center reared up. 
At that time, the Blessed One smiled. Then Venerable Subhūti asked the Blessed One, “Blessed Lord, what is the reason and what are the circumstances for your smile?”
Venerable Subhūti having asked this, the Blessed One then said to him, “Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the eastern direction, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the southern direction, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the western direction, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the northern direction, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the northeastern intermediate direction, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the southeastern intermediate direction, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the southwestern intermediate direction, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the northwestern intermediate direction, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the direction of the nadir, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings. Subhūti, just as I teach the perfection of wisdom in this world system of Patient Endurance, in immeasurable and countless world systems of the direction of the zenith, too, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas teach this very perfection of wisdom to bodhisattva great beings.”
When this teaching on the perfection of wisdom was being delivered, twelve billion gods and human beings developed the acceptance that phenomena are nonarising, Also, when the blessed lord buddhas taught this perfection of wisdom in world systems in all the ten directions, an immeasurable, countless number of beings set their minds on unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment.
This completes the thirteenth chapter, “Subhūti,” from The Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand Lines. 