
The Noble Dhāraṇī of Vajrabhairava 
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
The victors and their heirs are stainless and remove all stain.
They are infinite, unbounded, beneficent, and vast.
May they all kindly and constantly grant me the most supreme and illimitable boon.
These are my vajra statements.
arara asama samatā anantadharmmatre khaṇā khaṇā mahāvire calesa mama āsahā mahābale kaṇa kaṇa mahābala āgrihe ha ha vajrā vajrahāye dhara dhara hūṃ hūṃ maṇḍala samapara-akravikrame kuru kuru turu turu sarvathā sarva hi jvala jvala akriṇi phaṭ svāhā When this essence of all vidyās and mantras has been recited a thousand times in the presence of the tathāgatas, all vidyās and mantras will have been recited a hundred thousand times.
It accomplishes all other ritual actions unfailingly and without obstacle, for this, among all the vidyās, mantras, heart mantras, and dhāraṇīs originating from The Ritual of the Three Commitments, is the one that accomplishes all ritual actions.
The violent rite is like a cast vajra That cannot be destroyed by the Thirty-Three gods, The nāgas, gods, or rākṣasas— Due to its wrath even Śakra himself, Who is worshiped by the very gods, trembles.
No bhūta would disparage it.
It is the most excellent of protections.
In the world with its gods, There is no teacher like the Buddha— By these words of truth may all beings be protected!
tadyathā | oṃ vajraprākāra vajraprākāra vajra­daṃṣṭā bhayābhahā curu curu paricumbike culutele namo ratnatrayāya namo vajra­bhairavasya mahāgaṇapatisya vajraśakti parśupāśahastāya vajrakanka vajravaiḍūrya alaṅkṛtaśarīrāya vajrapāṇir anupālāya tadyathā bhuru bhuru ānayā ānayā mahāgaṇapati laghu laghu ehi ehi ākrama ākrama śarīraṃ gṛhītam graṃhītam daṃṣṭāmā daṃśṭrīmāvā attra viśatu śarīraṃ kiñ cirāyasi vidhuna vadhana paṭa paṭa kampa kampa raṅga raṅga moda moda dhama dhama vijṛmabā vijṛmabā pūra pūra ghūrṇṇa ghūrṇṇa āviśa āviśa śīghraṃ śīghraṃ mahāvajrabhairabhe gaṇapatir ājñāvayati svāhā As for the rite, to paralyze all one’s enemies and counter all kākhordas, after a square maṇḍala has been prepared on cow dung and a weapon incanted seven times in a wrathful state of mind, all kākhordas will be disrupted the moment the weapon is stabbed into the ground.
When, wishing to repel an enemy army, one incants a rod seven times and hurls it in the army's direction, all the enemy soldiers will fall into a stupor.
If one wishes to subjugate nāgas, one should wrathfully incant a vajra seven times and thrust it at them.
This will bring the nāgas under one’s control.
When, wishing to repel hail, one spins a vajra in utter absence of forcefulness while reciting the words at low pitch and in utter secrecy, the nāgas will refrain from sending down hail.
When, wishing to preserve liquor, one incants the ingredients and mustard seeds seven times, they will endure.
When, wishing to allay an illness, one incants the medicines appropriate to the illness seven times mixed in water and then drinks or applies it, one will be freed from illness.
When, wishing to perform any rite, one recites the dhāraṇī seven times, one’s intention will be accomplished.
This completes “The Noble Dhāraṇī of Vajrabhairava,” which repels malevolence.
Though there are many dhāraṇīs that were spoken by the noble ones, This dhāraṇī was spoken directly by Vajrabhairava.
It is the supreme dhāraṇī endowed with the seven protective acts, The holiest dhāraṇī that is the most extraordinary yoga.
Translated in the presence of the great lord of yogins Amoghavajra and given to the Tibetan monk Kyo Öjung.
