
The Sūtra on the Timings for the Gaṇḍī 
Homage to the blessed Youthful Mañjuśrī.
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One was staying in the Bamboo Grove, in the Kalandakanivāpa near Rājagṛha.
The Blessed One called forth the monks and delivered the following teaching.
“Monks, I will explain the times of the year to you.
Listen well.
“Monks, in the first half of the first winter month, seven feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than four and a half feet is not.
In the second half of that month, eight feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than six feet is not.
In the first half of the middle winter month, nine feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than seven feet is not.
In the second half of that month, ten feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than eight feet is not.
In the first half of the last winter month, eleven feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than nine feet is not.
In the second half of that month, twelve feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than ten feet is not.
“In the first half of the first month of spring, eleven feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than nine feet is not.
In the second half of that month, ten feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than eight feet is not.
In the first half of the middle month of spring, nine feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than seven feet is not.
In the second half of that month, eight feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than six feet is not.
During the first half of the last month of spring, seven feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than five feet is not.
In the second half of that month, six feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than four feet is not.
“In the first half of the first month of summer, six feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than four feet is not.
In the second half of that month, five feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than three feet is not.
In the first half of the middle month of summer, four feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than three feet is not.
In the second half of that month, four feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than two feet is not.
In the first half of the last summer month, three feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than two feet is not.
“In the first half of the first month of fall, three feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than two and a half feet is not.
In the second half of that month, two feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than half a foot is not.
In the first half of the middle month of fall, four feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than two feet is not.
In the second half of that month, four feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than two feet is not.
In the first half of the last month of fall, five feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than three feet is not.
In the second half of that month, six feet is the time for the gaṇḍī; a fingerbreadth less than four feet is not.”
After the Blessed One spoke these words, the monks rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had taught.
This completes “The Sūtra on the Timings for the Gaṇḍī.”
Translated by the Indian preceptor Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna and the translator monk Gewai Lodrö.


