
Śrīdevī Kālī’s One Hundred and Eight Names 
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One was dwelling on Vulture Peak Mountain, where he was delivering a teaching on correct names to all causal and resultant bodhisattvas.
At that time, Śrīdevī Mahākālī approached the Blessed One, circled him three times, and sat to one side in the presence of the Blessed One.
The bodhisattva Virility of a Lion asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One, what are the different names of this bodhisattva who acts for the benefit of the world while adorned as a rākṣasī?”
The Blessed One considered the bodhisattva Virility of a Lion, looked at Śrīdevī Kālī, and said: “You are identified as the cause, effect, and conditions That are paramount for listening, contemplating, and meditating.
Supreme among the wise, you benefit beings.
You are the exalted Śrīdevī Kālī.
“You are a bodhisattva emanation, A foundation as stable as the earth, You gather good qualities like water, And cause awakening to ripen, like fire.
“You gather virtue like the blowing wind And your insight is pure, like space.
Thus are you like the great elements, Praised by great hosts of beings.
“You know the actions and ripenings For accumulating merit and wisdom.
You know how to tame with your prideful form And travel the path of insight and compassion.
“You are like a beautiful vessel With water like a wish-fulfilling jewel.
You are a wish-fulfilling tree that benefits all And have a radiance like the sun.
“Your mind shines like the moon, Your name is like the horns of a rabbit, Your mental continuum is like a circle, And you are rare like an udumbara flower.
“You completely satisfy like amṛta, Are the ruler of all beings, Teach that there is no inherent nature, And are like a storm of water and sky.
“You use any means to tame disciples in the three existences And protect the teachings of the victors of the three times.
You are truly one with holy beings And travel the path of the holy ones.
“You are a goddess, mātṛkā, yakṣiṇī, Rākṣasī, nāgī, piśācī, Vyāḍā, bhūtā, kumbhāṇḍā, Rudrā, and ravenous vidyutā.
“You are a wind goddess, Kālī, Bhairavī, A ḍākinī, Caṇḍālī, and Tārā.
You tame through rites of pacifying, enriching, enthralling, and assault, And display the colors white, yellow, green, black, and red.
“You appear in eight different forms, Teach in a way suitable for beings in the six realms, Are able to explain the five aggregates, Satisfy the senses, and teach the five sense objects.
“You understand the workings of dependent origination, Are skilled in severing the sense organs, Are similarly skilled in killing all enemies, And strive to kill all embodied beings While knowing well that the mind is not killed.
“You are far removed from saṃsāra, With the attributes of a bodhisattva, And have been prophesied by the thus-gone ones.
Glorious Lady who protects the world, You are a friend to those who preserve the holy Dharma.
oṁ āḥ hūṁ śrīdevi kāli samayaja­ḍākinīḍāya samaya svāhā “Those who grasp these one hundred and eight names Will also attain one hundred and eight qualities.
They will not experience the suffering of hell, Will not take birth in the preta realm, And will never be burdened with an animal birth.
“If they are born in the land of Videha, They will not be struck by lightning and the like, They will not be affected by wind in Uttarakuru, And the rivers and floods in Godānīya Will not be able to sweep them away.
“Those who are born in Jambudvīpa, Will not be threatened by its many dangers.
When born among the gods of the desire realm, They will delight in the Dharma.
“For those who are born in the four dhyāna states, The four immeasurables will increase.
In the four formless realms There are no referents and there is no birth, But still they will not lack perception.
“In the abodes of the noble ones, They will serve their own purpose in the manner of the three realms, All without attachment to objects as permanent.
They will not grasp at thought And will purify the six root afflictions, The twenty derivative afflictions, And even the five inexpiable acts.
“They will not be born in the eight unfavorable conditions For many incalculable eons.
They will refute the critiques of non-Buddhists And possess exceptional power.
“They will have a long life, good health, and good fortune, And not experience hardship for many eons.
They will never fall in saṃsāra, But in order to attain nirvāṇa Will traverse the grounds of the śrāvakas And understand the twelve links of dependent origination.
“They will traverse the bodhisattva grounds: Joyful, Stainless, Illuminating, Radiant, Difficult to Conquer, Manifest, Far Reaching, Unwavering, Eminence, and Cloud of Dharma.
“They will complete the twelve unsurpassed great grounds of a buddha: Universal Light, Light of Immortality, Light of Space, Vajra Light, Jeweled Light, Lotus Light, Light of Karma, the Incomparable Ground, The Glorious Ground, Light of Insight, Omniscience, and Self-Reflexive Awareness.
The twelve buddha grounds Will be quickly completed as they occur.
“Even when these levels are not yet attained, They will benefit beings, Come to possess insight and compassion, And be protected by those who delight in the Dharma.
They will attain siddhi And become thus-gone ones born from jewels.
“Those who bear in mind The one hundred and eight names Of the glorious bodhisattva, Śrīdevī Kālī, Will attain one hundred and eight qualities.
They will perfect their body, speech, and mind, And become dharma kings of the three realms.”
When this was said, Śrīdevī Mahākālī and those in the assembly of bodhisattvas were amazed, and rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
This concludes “Śrīdevī Kālī’s One Hundred and Eight Names and Her Qualities.”


