
The Noble Dhāraṇī of the Goddess Cundā 
Homage to the Three Jewels.
Homage to the blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfectly awakened buddha Vairocana.
Homage to you, blessed Goddess Cundā, who has immeasurable power and strength, has magical powers and tramples enemies, and is celebrated and praised by all the thus-gone ones.
Please bring me good fortune in every way and at all times.
namaḥ saptānāṃ samyaksam­buddha­koṭīnāṃ | tadyathā | oṁ cale cule cunde svāhā Diligent one with pristine discipline.
Great powerful one.
Great conqueror of enemies.
In your hands you hold a sword, a battle axe, a hook, and a noose.
Great wrathful one.
Queen of the great wrathful ones.
Goddess with a fierce form, Anantā’s face, and one-thousand arms.
Invincible one whom no enemy can withstand.
Unfailing one, who is so difficult to tame.
Goddess with a thousand eyes who is blessed by all the thus-gone ones.
Goddess whom all gods venerate, and to whom they all make offerings.
Goddess whose nails are vajras, who is a vajra filled with vajras, and who is armed with vajras.
Goddess with a vajra body, vajra fists, and wrathful vajra eyes that dart about.
Fierce one who transforms into and displays a fierce form, and whose body is adorned with vajra and beryl ornaments.
oṁ bhagavati cunde hūṁ hūṁ krūṁ krūṁ mrūṁ mrūṁ sruṁ sruṁ rūṃ rūṃ āveśaya gṛhṇa gṛhṇa gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇāpaya hara hara bhañja bhañja sara sara mara mara māraya māraya paca paca daha daha gṛhṇa gṛhṇa—all manner of hostile grahas; one, two, three, four, and seven-day fevers; persistent and momentary fevers; bhūta, vetāla, preta, piśāca, yakṣa, rākṣasa, and kumbhāṇḍa grahas; beings who are born from a womb; beings who are born, transmigrate, and abide in a particular realm due to karma; any hostile beings who might harm me; and all manner of evil beings—saṃdhaya saṃdhaya mardaya mardaya ṣośaya ṣośaya tāpaya tāpaya utsādhaya utsādhaya hana hana vajreṇa sara sara daṇḍena māraya māraya khaḍgena hūṁ hūṁ hūṁ cūṃ cūṃ cūṃ drūṃ drūṃ drūṃ oṁ cale cule cunde sarvārthasādhaya svāhā May the blessing and power of the blessed noble Goddess Cundā protect me from all harm and bring me good fortune svāhā.
This concludes “The Noble Dhāraṇī of the Goddess Cundā.”


