
The Siṃhanāda Tantra 
Homage to the blessed Lotus Lord of Speech.
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One, transformed into Padmeśvara, was residing at Vajrāsana.
The Lord of Guhyakas said to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, how does one train in the accumulation of merit and wisdom, and in the path?”
The Blessed One answered, “Amazing! There is someone called Avalokiteśvara Siṃhanāda, who has supreme love and compassion for beings.
One should contemplate how he previously trained on the path and gathered the accumulations of merit and wisdom.”
Then the blessed Padmeśvara rose and pronounced this secret mantra: namo ratna trayāya | nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya bodhisattvāya mahasattvāya mahākāruṇikāya || tadyathā | oṁ akaṭe vikaṭe nikaṭe kaṭaṃkaṭe karoṭe karokaṃṭe vīryai svāhā | oṁ āḥ hrīḥ siṃhanāda hūṁ | bruṁ āṁ jrīṁ khaṁ hūṁ | oṁ āḥ hūṃ | oṁ balīn bhuñja jiva puśpe dhūpe hūṁ | sarvāmṛte hūṁ | oṁ vatali mahā­vatali hūṁ hūṁ hūṁ jaḥ svāhā | oṁ bhakṣa bhakṣa samaya tiṣṭha jaṃ hūṁ phaṭ svāhā | oṁ taprati hūṁ phaṭ | sritikara hūṁ phaṭ | oṁ varuṇa āgacchaya āgacchaya mahānāga gisati sarve bhuraḥ phuḥ phuḥ phuḥ svāhā | oṁ bhagavati śruti­smṛti­samavati saramati siddhi svāhā | oṁ āḥ hrīḥ hūṃ svāhā | phuḥ hrīḥ | oṁ siṃhanāda hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ | nāgadupali māraya phaṭ | jvāla jvāla hūṁ phaṭ | oṁ āḥvighnāntakṛt hūṁ | oṁ agnaye ativya abhisamayaviśa mahāśriye havyakavyam ahanīya svāhā | oṁ bhavaka agnaye śāntiṃ kuru svāhā | oṁ hrīḥ siṃhanāda vajra­cakra­vartalokika bruṁ bruṁ bruṁ | lokottarāṇi siṃhanāda bruṁ bruṁ bruṁ hūṁ na hūṁ na siṃhanāda bruṁ bruṁ bruṁ hūṁ hūṁ hūṁ svāhā || “Lord of Guhyakas, this is called the accomplishment of the maṇḍala.
It includes the ritual actions of killing, averting, summoning, binding, and pacifying.
In the morning, make a maṇḍala with cow dung that has not fallen to the ground.
Please the nāgas by holding the three sweet substances in the palm of your hand. This pacifies the anger of the nāgas.
“Called a leader of nāgas, He is seated in the posture of royal ease On a moon disc atop a lion.
At his right is a skull-bearing trident, Which brings hostile kṣatriyas under his control.
Atop a lotus sits a skull cup, A water lily imbued with the four activities, And a sword infused with wisdom.
“His body, in the guise of an ascetic, Is adorned by the five families.
The three and five hang down in front, And his crown is adorned with Amitābha.
He has arisen from the qualities of a lion.
“There are two-petaled red lotuses And four lotuses with four mantras.
Your own body stands below with palms joined, Bowing to his body and performing the activities.
“The mantra emits light from the heart Of Akṣobhya who sits at the vajra seat.
You should recite twenty-one times The mantra endowed with the three joys.
“Lord of Guhyakas, whoever deprecates this tantra deprecates all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Lords of Guhyakas, the gods of the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the brahmaputras, and the great brahmas will protect, guard, conceal, and always accompany any being who hears this tantra, thinks of it, worships it, upholds it, or even just takes an interest in it.
All the buddhas and bodhisattvas, who are greatly superior to those gods, will protect such beings just as a mother protects her child and the māras will never be able to obstruct them.
When they die, they will take birth in lotuses in the western realm of Sukhāvatī, freed from the pain of the womb.
In this life, they will be freed from any fear of fire or water.
Here I have only briefly stated the benefits, but apart from these all that is wished for will be fulfilled exactly as desired.
“If someone damages this tantra, is hostile toward it, or thinks about it improperly, you gods and nāgas must protect it!”
The Lord of Guhyakas along with the gods of the Realm of Brahma were delighted and agreed to this.
Additionally, in order to protect others, if one incants white earth many times, all obstacles will be pacified.
This concludes “The Siṃhanāda Tantra.”
It was edited, translated, and finalized by the Indian preceptor Prajñākāra and the Tibetan translator Gö Khukpa Lhetse.


