
The Tantra on the Origin of All Rites of Tārā, Mother of All the Tathāgatas 
Introduction Chapter 1 
Homage to noble Mañjuśrī!
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One was residing in Tuṣita with Maitreya, Mañjuśrī, Kurukullā, Parṇaśavarī, Brahmā, Śakra, and countless other bodhisattvas, gods, and goddesses, who circumambulated him clockwise while holding up an array of offerings beyond count, including heavenly flowers such as lotuses, water lilies, and mandārava flowers, heavenly instruments such as conches, vīṇās, drums, clay drums, and śūrpavīṇās, and heavenly parasols, banners, flags, and the like.
They worshiped him with clouds of diverse offerings.
The Blessed One then entered the vajra-like samādhi that vanquishes all opponents.
The entire earth shook immediately, the maṇḍala of māras was defeated, and the Blessed One radiated intense light in a spectrum of different colors—white, red, yellow, green, dark blue, and a combination of colors—that purified everyone who was suffering.
Tārā, the mother of all the buddhas, then descended to the goddess Kurukullā’s crown.
At that very instant, rain showered down from the offering clouds, and the goddess became like the orb of the sun unobscured by clouds.
The Blessed One then lauded her with this verse of praise: “Throughout all utterly pure realms, Precious flowers are raining down.
Mother of all the buddhas throughout the three times, Mother Tārā, I praise and revere you!”
At that moment, the bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī draped his shawl over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee, and addressed the Blessed One: “Blessed One, the buddhas of the three times are so profound.
How are they produced? Who says that Tārā is their mother?”
The Blessed One replied, “Mañjuśrī, what you say is indeed true.
The buddhas of the three times are not born and do not cease; they are neither defiled nor free of defilement, they do not increase or decrease, and are by nature nirvāṇa.
Thus, they are the very nature of all things.”
The bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī then asked, “Blessed One, if the buddhas of the three times are not born and do not cease, are neither defiled nor free of defilement, do not increase or decrease, and are by nature nirvāṇa, how do they take birth?”
The Blessed One replied, “Mañjuśrī, nirvāṇa is the ultimate; nirvāṇa is the realm of phenomena.
These are all synonyms for the very limit of reality.
Great compassion and relative essence are synonyms for saṃsāra.
Beyond these is the mother who gives birth to the buddhas of the three times.
Thus, she is beyond saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
Mañjuśrī, this is why she is considered a mother.”
“Therefore, Mañjuśrī,” the Blessed One continued, “knowing the essential nature of all things, meditate upon her.
Recite the following dhāraṇī-mantra, practice assiduously, know her qualities, and make offerings to her.
Receive instructions and rid yourself of all doubt.
Apply yourself to her rites, keep her praise in mind, and reach accomplishment by means of these different rites.”
Thus, the Blessed One taught the bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī.
This was the first chapter, “Providing an Introduction.”
Offering Chapter 2 The bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī then asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One, how should I meditate?
How should I assiduously practice this?”
“Mañjuśrī,” replied the Blessed One, “apply your mind as follows.
Mañjuśrī, you should meditate on the fact that all phenomena are unborn, all phenomena are unceasing, all phenomena are undefiled, and all phenomena are nirvāṇa and naturally pure.
“Mañjuśrī, to that end, recite this mantra: “oṁ svabhāvaśuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāvaśuddho ’ham.”
The Blessed One continued, “Cultivate loving kindness while reflecting on those who are born from the womb, from eggs, and from heat and moisture, and those born miraculously.
Generate great compassion focusing on birth, aging, illness, and death.
Cultivate joy and equanimity in emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, and the naturally unconditioned.
Mañjuśrī, the four immeasurables thus are the cause that produces bodhicitta, so take this earnestly to heart.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, recite the following mantra: “oṁ bodhicittam utpādaya aham.”
The Blessed One continued, “You should offer worship with the following offerings: “To the mother who gave birth to the victors I offer dishes of different powdered incenses That have been blessed by the buddhas Who dwell in the worlds of the ten directions.
“To Buddhalocanā, supreme mother of the tathāgatas Who dwell in the worlds of the ten directions, The mother who gave birth to the victors, I offer flower petals and garlands of every type.
“To the precious supreme mother of the tathāgatas Who dwell in the worlds of the ten directions, The mother who gave birth to the victors, I offer rows of exquisite lamps.
“To Pāṇḍaravāsinī, supreme mother of the tathāgatas Who dwell in the worlds of the ten directions, The mother who gave birth to the victors, I offer the most fragrant water, delicious and pure.
“To the supreme mother who gave birth to the victors Who dwell in the worlds of the ten directions, The mother of the victors who is rich with activity, I offer a feast of food and drink.
“May the sounds of song, instruments, and cymbals, Assuaging each and every ill, As well as parasols, banners, flags, and streamers, Fill the ten directions like clouds!
“May trees that grant all wishes, Trees rich with fruit, trees fragrant with scent, And trees laden with leaf boughs Cover all of the ten directions!
“May rains infused with perfumed fragrance, Rains with the delicious scent Of grains, flowers, and all pleasing things, Pour down regularly in all directions!
“To the mother who gave birth to the victors, I offer dwellings that delight the mind— Exquisite mansions made of jewels Adorned with long and short garlands, With the shining sun and moon in the east and west And with rivers, reservoirs, and ponds, Lakes and pools, And seas of a hundred flavors, All with geese and other birds.”
“Mañjuśrī, to this end, recite the following offering mantra: “oṁ sarva-tathāgata-dhūpa-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṁ.
oṁ sarva-tathāgata-puṣpa-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṁ.
oṁ sarva-tathāgata-āloka-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṁ.
oṁ sarva-tathāgata-gandha-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṁ.
oṁ sarva-tathāgata-naivedya-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṁ.
oṁ sarva-tathāgata-śabda-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye hūṁ.”
This was the second chapter, “Offering.”
Praise Chapter 3 The Blessed One again addressed the bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī, “Mañjuśrī, this mother is the mother of all the buddhas of the three times.
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, memorize this praise used by all the buddhas of the three times.”
The Blessed One then recited this dhāraṇī-mantra of praise: “namaḥ sarva-tathāgatānāṃ tadyathā oṁ namaḥ sūkasaṃ namaḥ tārāyai tāramātā.
“namas tāre ture vīre kṣana-dyuti-nibhekṣaṇe.
trailokya-nātha-vaktrābja-vikasat-keśarodbhave.
“namaḥ śata-śarac-candra-saṃpūrṇa-paṭalānane tārā-sahasra-nikara-prahasat-kiraṇojjvale.
“namaḥ kanaka-nīlābja-pāṇi-padma-vibhūṣite dāna-vīrya-tapaḥ-śānti-titikṣā-dhyāna-gocare.
“namas tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-vijayānanta-cāriṇi aśeṣa-pāramitā-prāpta-jina-putra-niṣevite.
“namas tuttāra-hūṁ-kāra-pūritāśā-dig-antare sapta-loka-kramākrānti niḥśeṣākarṣaṇakṣame.
“namaḥ śakrānala-brahma-marud-viśveśvarārcite bhūta-vetāla-gandharva-gaṇa-yakṣa-puras-kṛte.
“namas traḍ iti phaṭ-kāra-para-yantra-pramardini pratyālīḍha-pada-nyāse śikhi-jvālākulekṣane.
“namas ture mahā-ghore māra-vīra-vināśane bhṛkuṭī-kṛta-vaktrābja-sarva-śatru-niṣūdani.
“namas tri-ratna-mudrāṅka-hṛdyāṅguli-vibhūṣite bhūṣitāśeṣa-dik-cakra-nikara-svakarākule.
“namaḥ pramuditāṭopa-mukuṭā-kṣipta-mālini hasat-prahasa-tuttāre māra-loka-vaśaṅkari.
“namaḥ samanta-bhūpāla-paṭalākarṣaṇa-kṣame calad-bhṛkuṭi-hūṁ-kāra-sarvāpada-vimocani.
“namaḥ śikhaṇḍa-khaṇḍeṇdu-mukuṭābharaṇojjvale amitābha-jaṭābhāra-bhāsure kiraṇa-dhruve.
“namaḥ kalpānta-hutabhug-jvālā-mālāntara-sthite ālīḍha-muditā-bandha-ripu-cakra-vināśani.
“namaḥ kara-talāghāta-caraṇāhata-bhūtale bhṛkuṭī-kṛta-hūṁ-kāra-sapta-pātāla-bhedini.
“namaḥ śive śubhe śānte śānta-nirvāṇa-gocare svāhā-praṇava-saṃyukte mahā-pātaka-nāśani.
“namaḥ pramuditābandha-ripu-gātra-prabhedini daśākṣara-pada-nyāse vidyā-hūṁ-kāra-dīpite.
“namas ture padāghāta-hūṁ-kārākāra-bījite meru-mandara-kailāsa-bhuvana-traya-cālini.
“namaḥ sura-sarākāra-hariṇāṅka-kara-sthite tāra-dvir-ukta-phaṭ-kāra aśeṣa-viṣa-nāśani.
“namaḥ sura-gaṇādhyakṣa-sura-kinnara-sevite ābandha-muditā-bhoga-kali-duḥsvapna-nāśani.
“namaś candrārka-sampūrṇa-nayana-dyuti-bhāsure hara-dvir-ukta-tuttāre viṣama-jvara-nāśani.
“namas tri-tattva-vinyāsa-śiva-śakti-samanvite graha-vetāla-yakṣaugha-nāśani pravare ture.
“mantra-mūlam idaṃ stotraṃ namas-kāraika-viṃśakam yaḥ paṭhet prayato dhīmān devyām bhakti-samanvitaḥ.
“sāyaṃ vā prātar utthāya smaret sarvābhaya-pradam sarva-pāpa-praśamanaṃ sarva-durgati-nāśanam.
“abhiṣikto bhavet tūrṇaṃ saptabhir jina-koṭibhiḥ asmin mahattvam āsādya so ’nte bauddha-padaṃ vrajet.
“viṣaṃ tasya mahā-ghoraṃ sthāvaraṃ cātha jaṅgamam smaraṇāt pralayaṃ yāti khāditam pītam eva vā.
“graha-jvara-viṣārtānām paramārti-vināśanam anyeṣāṃ caiva sattvānāṃ dvis-tri-saptābhivartanam.
“putra-kāmo labhet putraṃ dhana-kāmo labhed dhanam sarva-kāmān avāpnoti na vighnaiḥ pratihanyate.
“tārā-bhagavatīyaṃ sūtraṃ samyak-sambuddha-bhāṣitam.
“sarva-kara | samayā ulakaraye buddhaṃ ca dharmaṃ ca saṅghaṃ ca tāraye svāhā.
“Mañjuśrī, this dhāraṇī was blessed by all the buddhas of the three times.
It extols Tārā, the mother of all the buddhas of the three times, by vanquishing all evil.
Its benefits are inconceivable.
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, recite it!
“The person who recites this dhāraṇī will never be reborn as a hell being, as a hungry ghost, as an animal, or in any other such miserable state.
They will never be reborn in borderlands, as a barbarian, with impaired faculties, or the like.
They will be freed from the dangers of fever, boils, infectious diseases, and all other illnesses, and such perils will not reoccur.
They will be freed from the eight great dangers and the like.
“Mañjuśrī, the person who memorizes this praise used by all the buddhas of the three times makes offerings to all of them.
All the acts with immediate retribution and other misdeeds of the person who memorizes this will be purified, and that person will see all the buddhas.
They will not meet an untimely death, and, when the time of death comes, they will see Tārā, the mother of all the buddhas of the three times.
The person who memorizes this will be able to accomplish whatever they have in mind.
They will obtain a perfect body, a perfect complexion, and all other perfect attributes.
Nightmares, bad omens, and interference by nonhumans will all be pacified.
They will come to see the truth of the three times and behold Tārā’s form in person.
“One should recite this: “namaḥ sarva-tathāgata-samyak-sambuddhāya trāyate tārate tu tāra.”
This was the third chapter, “Praise.”
Deities Chapter 4 The bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī then asked the Blessed One, “In what way should I earnestly focus on this dhāraṇī-mantra?”
The Blessed One replied, “You should earnestly focus on this dhāraṇī while wishing to be free of suffering and pursuing the profound.
You should then visualize light rays, streaming forth from the syllable tāṁ, that transform everything above and below into vajra.
Next, Mañjuśrī, you should recite the mantra oṁ vajra jvala vajra tana hūṁ phaṭ.
Then, visualize a white syllable e appearing from tāṁ.
Above that, visualize a blue vaṁ, on top of which is a yellow laṁ, on top of which is a green yaṁ, on top of which is a red raṁ.
All of these syllables emanate and reabsorb light rays.
“oṁ dharmadhātu-viśuddha hūṁ | oṁ aṃ dhātu-viśuddha hūṁ | oṁ samanta-viśuddha hūṁ | oṁ pakṣa-viśuddha hūṁ | oṁ kṣata-vyutthāna-viśuddha hūṁ | oṁ namaḥ sarva-tathāgata-maṇḍala samanta-viśuddha hūṁ.
“Mañjuśrī, while reciting this mantra generate the maṇḍala mansion: a square building sitting on a four-petaled, multicolored lotus and encircled by a fence of vajras.
It has four gateways with eight pillars and is beautified by short and long garlands, tassels of jewels, and other festooned decorations.
Generate the maṇḍala mansion in this way.
“In the center of the mansion, on the anthers of the lotus, sits a moon and lotus. Atop this lotus is a green syllable tāṁ, from which appears an utpala flower marked by tāṁ.
Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
Tārā appears from the utpala flower, green bodied and with one face and two arms.
Her right hand makes the boon-granting gesture, and her left hand holds an utpala flower by the stem.
Her gorgeous body is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, as well as many other types of ornaments.
She is in the prime of youth, has a smiling face, and is seated on a moon and lotus with her legs evenly crossed.
“On a moon and lotus in the east, visualize the syllable tāṁ transforming into a dark blue utpala flower marked by the seed syllable.
Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
From that utpala flower appears a dark blue Tārā with two arms.
She holds a trident in her right hand and an utpala flower, by the stem, in her left. Her gorgeous body is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, as well as many other types of ornaments.
She is in the prime of youth, has a smiling face, and is seated on a moon and lotus with her legs evenly crossed.
“On a moon and lotus in the south, visualize the syllable re transforming into a yellow utpala flower marked by the seed syllable.
Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
The Tārā who appears from this utpala is the color of molten gold and has two arms.
She holds a sword in her right hand and an utpala flower, by the stem, in her left.
Her gorgeous body is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, as well as many other types of ornaments.
She is in the prime of youth, has a smiling face, and is seated on a moon and lotus with her legs evenly crossed.
“On a moon and lotus in the west, visualize the syllable tu transforming into a red utpala flower marked by the seed syllable.
Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
From that utpala flower appears a red Tārā with two arms.
She holds a wheel in her right hand and an utpala flower, by the stem, in her left.
Her gorgeous body is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, as well as many other types of ornaments. She is in the prime of youth, has a smiling face, and is seated on a moon and lotus with her legs evenly crossed.
“On a moon and lotus in the north, visualize the syllable tāṁ transforming into a green utpala flower marked by the seed syllable.
Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
From that utpala flower appears a green Tārā with two arms. She holds a parasol in her right hand and an utpala flower, by the stem, in her left. Her gorgeous body is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, and many other ornaments. She is in the prime of youth, has a smiling face, and is seated on a moon and lotus seat with her legs evenly crossed. “On a moon and lotus at the eastern gate, visualize the syllable tāṁ transforming into an utpala flower marked by the seed syllable.
Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
From that utpala flower appears Hook Tārā, white bodied and holding hooks in her two hands. Her wrathful form is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, and many other ornaments. She is in the prime of youth, has a slightly wrathful face, and is seated on a moon and lotus with one leg extended and the other drawn in.
“On a moon and lotus at the southern gate, visualize the syllable re transforming into an utpala flower marked by the seed syllable.
Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
From that utpala flower appears Lasso Tārā, yellow bodied, one faced, and holding lassos in her two hands.
Her wrathful form is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, and many other ornaments.
She is in the prime of youth, has a slightly wrathful face, and is seated on a moon and lotus with one leg extended and the other drawn in.
“On a moon and lotus at the western gate, visualize the syllable tu transforming into an utpala flower marked by the seed syllable. Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
From that utpala flower appears Shackles Tārā, red bodied and holding shackles in her two hands. Her wrathful form is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, and many other ornaments. She is in the prime of youth, has a wrathful face, and is seated on a moon and lotus seat with one leg extended and the other drawn in.
“On a moon and lotus at the northern gate, visualize the syllable re transforming into an utpala flower marked by the seed syllable.
Light rays stream forth from it, filling the entire world with multicolored light so that the whole world is seen as an apparition, an illusion, a rainbow, a mirage, a reflection in water, and an image in a mirror.
From that utpala flower appears Bell Tārā, green-blue in color and holding bells in her two hands. Her wrathful form is adorned with a long necklace, earrings, and armlets, all made of jewels, and many other ornaments.
She is in the prime of youth, has a wrathful face, and is seated on a moon and lotus with one leg extended and the other drawn in.
“Mañjuśrī, visualize the circle of deities in this way.”
Mañjuśrī then asked, “Blessed One, what is meant by ‘apparition’ and so forth?”
The Blessed One replied, “Mañjuśrī, being afflicted is the basic constitution of the six classes of beings.
Therefore, understand them to be like apparitions, illusions, rainbows, mirages, reflections in water, and images in a mirror.”
This was the fourth chapter, “The Deities.”
Initiation Chapter 5 Mañjuśrī then asked, “Blessed One, how are these deities to be empowered by deities?”
The Blessed One replied, “In the manner, Mañjuśrī, of apparitions, illusions, rainbows, mirages, reflections in water, and images in a mirror.”
Mañjuśrī then asked, “Blessed One, what is an ‘apparition’?”
The Blessed One replied, “An ‘apparition’ is something unreal that is mistaken by both.
An ‘illusion’ is something mistaken by others.
A ‘rainbow’ is empty.
A ‘mirage’ is a mistaken, empty appearance.
A ‘reflection in water’ is causal.
An ‘image in a mirror’ is like a city of gandharvas.
Mañjuśrī, this is delusion; this is the constitution of the afflicted.
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, the empowerment of deities by deities is similar to this.
“Mañjuśrī, apparitions, illusions, rainbows, mirages, reflections in water, and images in a mirror are unimpeded; they are free of all impediments.
They are not differentiated and lack differentiation.
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, think of their nature in this way.”
The Blessed One then granted empowerment with the vajra mudrā: palms joined so that there is an empty space between them, the two middle fingers raised so that they join at the tips, the two index fingers and two ring fingers pressed against the sides of the middle fingers, and the little fingers and thumbs placed inside with their tips touching.
The mantra to be recited is: oṁ sarva-tathāgata ahaṃ vajras tana sarva-tathāgata-vajras tana hūṁ.
Following that, the Blessed One conferred empowerment with the jewel mudrā: hands joined at the palms, the little fingers and ring fingers spread out, the tips of the middle fingers joined, and the thumbs pressing down on the two index fingers.
Placing his hands above his head, he recited this mantra: “oṁ sarva-tathāgata-cintāmaṇi-jvalani sarva-tathāgata ahaṃ śuddha-pariśuddhāya svāhā.”
All buddhas throughout all ten directions conferred initiation and bestowed empowerment with this mantra.
Then, the Blessed One formed the samaya mudrā of all the heart families: hands joined at the palms with the fingertips interlaced, middle fingers stretched out, and thumbs and little fingers joined and stretched out. This is the samaya mudrā.
The mantra is: oṁ sarva-tathāgata-vajra-samaya hūṁ.
This was the fifth chapter, “Initiation.”
Mantras Chapter 6 The bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī then spoke these lines of praise for the Mother: “Her moon-and-sun-like form, Green in color and graceful in bearing, Is poised atop a lotus and moon.
I salute and praise the mother of all the buddhas And protector of all beings, Who holds an utpala in her hand!”
He then asked, “Blessed One, how is the mantra of the Mother practiced?
The Blessed One replied, “Her dhāraṇī-mantra is as follows: “oṁ namo ratna-trayāya | namas traiyadhva-sarva-tathāgatānāṃ namas tārāyai.
“namas tāre ture vīre kṣaṇa-dyuti-nibhekṣane trailokya-nātha-vaktrābja-vikasat-keśarodbhave.
“namaḥ śata-śarac-candra-sampūrṇa-paṭalānane tārā-sahasra-nikara-prahasat-kiraṇojjvale.
“namaḥ kanaka-nīlābja-pāṇi-padma-vibhūṣite dāna-vīrya-tapaḥ-śānti-titikṣā-dhyāna-gocare.
“namas tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-vijayānanta-cāriṇi aśeṣa-pāramitā-prāpta-jina-putra-niṣevite.
“tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“That is the dhāraṇī-mantra you should recite.
“The heart mantra is: “oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“The heart mantra for the lotus family is: “oṁ tuttāre ture ture svāhā.
“The heart mantra for the jewel family is: “oṁ tāre ture ture svāhā.
“The heart mantra for the karma family is: “oṁ ture tuttāre svāhā.
“The heart mantra for the vajra family is: “oṁ tāre tuttāre tāre svāhā.
“The heart mantra for the various rites is: “oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“The mantra for enthralling is: “oṁ tāre tāre tuttāre hūṁ-kāra-pūritāśā-dig-antare | sapta-loka-kramākrānti | aśeṣākarṣaṇa-kṣami hrīḥ.
“The mantra for increasing is: “oṁ tāre tāre tuttāre hūṁ svāhā-kāra-pūritāśā-dig-antare | sapta-loka-kramākrānti aśeṣa-puṣṭiṃ kuru ākarṣaṇa-kṣami ho.
“The mantra for rites is: “oṁ tāre tāre tuttāre hūṁ-kāra-pūritāśā-dig-antare | sapta-loka-kramākrānti uṣṇīṣa alikaraya- ākarṣaṇa-kṣami phaṭ.
“The mantra for pacifying nāgas is: “oṁ tāre tāre tuttāre ture hūṁ-kāra-pūritāśā-dig-antare | sapta-loka-krāmākrānti aśeṣa-śāntiṃ kuru-ākarṣaṇa-kṣami svāhā.
“The mantra for the various rites is: “oṁ tāre tāre ture tuttāre svāhā.
“śakrānala-brahma-rudraiś ceśvarārcite bhūta-vetāla-gandharva-gaṇa-yakṣa-puras-kṛte.
“phaṭ-kāra-parayantra-pramardani pratyālīḍha-pada-nyāsa-śikhi-jvālākulekṣaṇe. “mahā-ghori māra-vīra-vināśani bhṛkuṭī-kṛta-vāktrābja-sarva-śatru-niṣūdani.
“ratna-mudrāṅka-hṛdyāṅguli-vibhūṣite bhūṣitāśeṣa-dik-cakra-nikara-sva-karākule.
“hūṁ hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ.
“The mantra for accomplishing all rites is: “oṁ indrāya | yamāya | varuṇāya | yakṣāya | agnaye | vāyave | nairṛtyai rakṣase. || “oṁ indra-pālāya | sūryāya candrāya | udaya-bhūmaye | a-kāro mukhaṃ sarva-dharmānām | ādyanutpannatvāt oṁ āḥ hūṁ phaṭ svāhā.”
This was the sixth chapter, “Mantra.”
The Pacifying Rite Chapter 7 “Mañjuśrī, the pacifying rite is as follows.
Sprinkle scented water in a shrine chamber, arrange a white maṇḍala there, anoint it with water infused with white sandalwood, and scatter flower petals over it.
In a white vase made of precious materials, place the five precious substances comprising gold, pearl, crystal, coral, and sapphire; the five types of incense comprising sandalwood, aloeswood, frankincense, camphor, and vetiver; the five types of grain comprising barley, wheat, pulses, rice, and sesame oil; and the five essences comprising molasses, honey, butter, salt, and sesame seeds.
Wrap the vase in a clean piece of cloth that has its fringe intact and place it in the center.
Arrange a further four full vases, as well as four incense burners, four sets of flowers, and so on.
Having completed these preparations, meditate as follows.
“Visualize the heroine Tārā, the mother rich in diligence who takes the form of a yoginī, emerging from the syllable tāṁ.
She springs from a blossoming lotus and sits on a full moon disk. Her body is white like the autumn moon, she is in the prime of youth, and she is beautifully adorned with a long necklace, armlets, jewel tassels, and other ornaments.
She wears a skirt made of Pañcāla cloth and a top made of silk from Kāśī. She is seated in the half-lotus posture, has one face and two hands, and smiles with darting eyes.
Her right hand is in the boon-granting gesture, and her left holds an utpala flower by the stem.
Light rays stream from her body, and amṛta flows down from the center of the white lotus and its anthers. She is accompanied by countless bodhisattvas, whose bodies also emit light.
As you imagine this, recite the following mantra: “oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“If you then recite this together with the mantra for the rite, either one, seven, twenty-one, or one hundred and eight times, and make a request, it will be fulfilled.
“Mañjuśrī, the benefits of this are such that the five acts with immediate retribution, the five secondary acts with immediate retribution, and all hostility and nightmares will be pacified.
Mañjuśrī, the benefits of this are such that the suffering of the three lower realms will be pacified, and you will never again be reborn in any of the eight unfree states.
Mañjuśrī, the benefits of this are such that you will come to remember your past lives, have lucid faculties, be intelligent, and become expert in all arts and crafts.
You will be endowed with perfect strength, complexion, and charisma.
All the worldly protectors will watch over you, protect you, conceal you, and assist you.
Wherever you go, everything will be auspicious.”
This was the seventh chapter, “The Pacifying Rite.”
The Increasing Rite Chapter 8 “Mañjuśrī, the rite for increasing is as follows.
Smear the floor of a shrine chamber with the five substances of a red-brown cow and arrange a maṇḍala anointed with scented water.
Pile heaps of flowers on it and set out an illustration for the increasing rite.
Prepare twenty-one pills made from the five precious substances, grains, medicinal substances, and so on, place them in an amulet made of precious materials, and set the amulet in the center of the maṇḍala.
Also arrange four incense burners, flowers, and so on.
Then, cultivate the following meditation. “Visualize the single heroine Tārā, the mother rich in swift diligence who takes the form of a yoginī, emerging from the syllable tāṁ. She springs from a blossoming lotus and sits upon a full moon disk. Her extensive body is yellow in color, radiant like the autumn moon, and aglow with youthfulness like the sun unobscured by clouds. She is beautifully adorned with a long necklace, armlets, jewel tassels, and other ornaments.
She wears a skirt made of Pañcāla cloth and a top made of silk from Kāśī.
She is seated in the half-lotus posture, has one face and two hands, and smiles with darting eyes.
Her right hand is in the boon-granting gesture, while her left holds an utpala flower by the stem.
Light rays stream from her body, and amṛta flows down from the center of the lotus and its anthers. She is accompanied by countless bodhisattvas, who emit light from their bodies and overcome the power of the throngs of gods, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, humans, gandharvas, mahoragas, and rākṣasas.
Visualizing this, recite the following mantra: “oṁ tāre tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“If you then recite it together with the mantra for the rite, either one, seven, twenty-one, or one hundred and eight times, and make a request, it will be fulfilled.
“Mañjuśrī, the benefits of this rite are such that even the throngs of gods, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, humans, gandharvas, mahoragas, and rākṣasas will be unable to withstand its power.
Rather, they will guard and protect you.
You will remain unharmed by untimely death, conflict, nightmares, bad omens, fever, boils, infectious diseases, and the like.
Even at the time of death, you will remain strong, and you will not be reborn in the lower realms.
“Mañjuśrī, through this rite you will acquire all necessary goods, longevity, vibrancy, and strength.
You will come to see the tathāgatas and be imbued with strength.”
This was the eighth chapter, “The Increasing Rite.”
The Enthralling Rite Chapter 9 “Mañjuśrī, the rite for enthralling is as follows.
Practice this rite in a charnel ground, by a lone tree, on the bank of a large river, or in a temple.
Smear the site with the five substances from a cow, and scatter flower petals over the maṇḍala that has been anointed with fragrant water.
Arrange an image of the Mother, together with incense burners, flowers, and so forth.
Fill an amulet made of precious materials with flowers, fruits, and other potent substances, and install it in the center of the maṇḍala.
Then cultivate the following meditation.
“Visualize the heroine Tārā, the mother rich in swift diligence who takes the form of a yoginī, emerging from the syllable tāṁ. She springs from a blossoming lotus and sits upon sun and moon disks. Her body is red in color like the bandhūka flower and is in the prime of youth. She is beautifully adorned with a long necklace, armlets, jewel tassels, and other ornaments.
She wears a skirt of Pañcāla cloth and a top made of silk from Kāśī.
She stands with a graceful poise, has one face and two hands, smiles, and laughs with darting eyes. Her right hand is at her heart in a gesture of reverence, and her left hand holds an utpala flower by the stem.
Her body radiates light, and from this light appear countless bodhisattvas together with countless goddesses, all vividly aglow with a flurry of light like her own.
While visualizing this, recite the following mantra: “oṁ tuttāre ture svāhā.
“If you then recite this together with the mantra for the rite, either one, seven, twenty-one, or one hundred and eight times, and make a request, it will be fulfilled.
“Mañjuśrī, the benefits of this are such that you will enthrall the entire threefold universe, including the lords of the earth, and have the ability to bring everything under your control.”
This was the ninth chapter, “The Enthralling Rite.”
The Aggressive Rite Chapter 10 “Mañjuśrī, if you wish to perform the aggressive rite you should do so in a charnel ground, by a lone tree, on the bank of a large river, or in a temple.
Sprinkle the site with the five substances from a cow, arrange a maṇḍala anointed with fragrant water, set out an image, and so forth.
Use neem water to draw an image of the king or other patron on birch bark, cloth, or other kind of bark, put the drawing inside a clay amulet atop the maṇḍala, and set the amulet on the maṇḍala.
In addition, arrange incense burners and other offerings.
Cultivate the following meditation. “Visualize the heroine Tārā, the mother rich in swift diligence who appears in the form of a yoginī, emerging from the syllable tāṁ. She springs from a blossoming lotus and sits upon sun and moon disks. Her body is green, radiant, and in the prime of youth. She is beautifully adorned with a long necklace, armlets, jewel tassels, and other ornaments.
She wears a skirt of Pañcāla cloth and a top made of silk from Kāśī. She is seated with her right leg outstretched and her left leg drawn in, has one face and two hands, and bares her teeth with her eyes ablaze. Her hair streams upward, Amitābha sits on a moon disk above her head, and she is surrounded by apocalyptic fire. In her right hand she holds a wheel, and with her left she makes the threatening gesture while holding an utpala flower by the stem.
Countless wrathful beings, both male and female, radiate from her body.
The mantra recitation is: “oṁ ture tuttāre ture svāhā.
“If you then recite it together with the mantra for the rite either one, seven, twenty-one, or one hundred and eight times, three times a day and three times a night, and make a request, it will be fulfilled.
“Mañjuśrī, the benefits of this are such that afflictions, karma, karmic ripening, rebirth in lower realms, and so on will all be overcome.
Mañjuśrī, vicious enemies, māras, obstructers, and other such harmful influences will also all be overcome.”
This was the tenth chapter, “The Aggressive Rite.”
The Rite for All Activities Chapter 11 “Mañjuśrī, the rite that can be used for all activities is as follows.
It should be performed in a charnel ground, by a lone tree, before a stūpa, or on the bank of a large river.
Smear the site with the five substances from a cow, scatter flower petals over a maṇḍala that has been anointed with fragrant water, and set out an image of the Mother.
At the heart of a wax effigy, insert a piece of charnel-ground shroud inscribed with the ten-syllable mantra and the two sets of syllables appended with the target’s name, and place the effigy in the center of the maṇḍala.
In addition, arrange incense burners, flowers, and so on.
Then cultivate the following meditation.
“Visualize the heroine Tārā, the mother rich in swift diligence who appears in the form of a yoginī, emerging from the syllable tāṁ.
She springs from a blossoming lotus and sits upon sun and moon disks. Her body is black, gleaming, and in the prime of youth. She is beautifully adorned with a long necklace, armlets, jewel tassels, and other ornaments.
She wears a skirt of Pañcāla cloth and a top made of silk from Kāśī. She is seated with one leg outstretched and the other drawn in, and she has one face and two hands. Baring her fangs in a shape like a crescent moon, her face is drawn in a frown, and she resounds with hūṁ. Her orange hair rises from her head, above which sits Amitābha upon a moon disk.
She is surrounded by apocalyptic fires from which emanate the eight goddesses that grant protection from the eight dangers. In her right hand she holds a curved knife, and in her left she holds an utpala flower by the stem, on top of which is a brahmin’s skull filled with flowers. She is surrounded by a horde of wrathful deities.
Visualizing this, recite the following mantra: “oṁ tāre ture tuttāre svāhā.
“If you then recite it together with the mantra for the rite either one, seven, twenty-one, or one hundred and eight times, three times a day and three times a night, and make a request, it will be fulfilled.
“Mañjuśrī, the benefits of this are such that all four activities will be accomplished, and you will be protected from all danger.”
This was the eleventh chapter, on the rite for all activities.
The Mother of the Vajra Family Chapter 12 Mañjuśrī again asked the Blessed One, “How is the mother who gives birth to all buddhas also the mother who is the essential identity of the five families?”
The Blessed One explained, “Mañjuśrī, the mother of the vajra family has four faces and eight hands, is the color of a conch, and is in the prime of youth.
Her four faces are white, black, red, and yellow.
Her head is marked by the five families, and she has three eyes.
Her four right hands hold a vajra, an arrow, and a short spear, while the lowermost hand is in the boon-granting gesture.
In her left hands she holds an utpala flower, a bow, and a vajra hook, and she wields a lasso while making the threatening gesture.
She sits in the vajra posture and is of dharmakāya nature.
“Mañjuśrī, this is her mantra: “namo ratna-trayāya | nama ārya-jñāna-sāgarāya | akṣobhya-vyūha-rājāya | tathāgatāya | arhate samyak-sambuddhāya | nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya | bodhisattvāya | mahāsattvāya | mahā-kāruṇikāya | tadyathā | oṁ tāre ture tuttāre svāhā.
“With this, the entire vajra family makes offerings of flowers, lamps, scented water, and fine foods.
“Mañjuśrī, her rite is as follows.
Mold a wax effigy of whoever is the target, and insert into the effigy’s heart the expelling substances—the flesh of a crow and owl—together with the name, and then recite this mantra: “oṁ amukam me vaśam ānaya svāhā.
“If you recite this and then hide the effigy in the northwest, Mañjuśrī, the target will meet with conflict and division and flee elsewhere.”
This was the twelfth chapter, “The Mother of the Vajra Family.”
The Mother of the Lotus Family Chapter 13 “Mañjuśrī, the mother of the lotus family has four faces and eight hands.
Her main face is red like a bandhūka flower, as is her youthful body.
Her right face is white, her left face black, and her rear face yellow. Each is marked on its crown with the four families and has three eyes.
In her right hands she holds a lotus, an arrow, and a spear, while the lowermost hand is in the boon-granting gesture.
In her left hands she holds an utpala flower, a bow, and a vajra hook, and she wields a lasso while making the threatening gesture.
She sits in the vajra posture and is of dharmakāya nature.
“Mañjuśrī, this is her mantra: “namo ratna-trayāya | nama ārya-jñāna-sāgarāya | amitābha-deva-vyūha-rājāya | tathāgatāya | arhate samyak-sambuddhāya | nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya | bodhisattvāya | mahāsattvāya | mahā-kāruṇikāya | tadyathā | oṁ tuttāre ture svāhā.
“With that, the entire lotus family makes offerings of flowers, incense, lamps, scented water, and foods.
“Mañjuśrī, her rite is as follows.
Grind datura, neem, and aśoka flowers, use honey to make the powder into an ointment with honey, and then recite this mantra: “oṁ amukābhidhānāṃ kumārīm mahyam udvāhena tasyaḥ pitā prayacchatu hūṁ hrīḥ.
“If you then apply the ointment to your body, the target will be helplessly drawn to you.”
This was the thirteenth chapter, “The Mother of the Lotus Family.”
The Mother of All the Tathāgatas Chapter 14 “Mañjuśrī, the mother of the tathāgata family has four faces and eight hands. Her body is yellow like molten gold and in the prime of youth.
Her main face is yellow, her right face is white, her left face is red, and her rear face is black. Each is marked on its crown with the four families and has three eyes.
In her right hands she holds a wheel, an arrow, and a spear, while the lowermost hand is in the boon-granting gesture.
In her left hands she holds an utpala flower, a bow, and a vajra hook, and she wields a lasso while making the threatening gesture.
She sits in the vajra posture and is of dharmakāya nature.
“Mañjuśrī, this is her mantra: “namo ratna-trayāya | namo ārya-jñāna-sāgarāya vairocana-vyūha-rājāya | tathāgatāya | arhate samyak-sambuddhāya | tadyathā | oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“With that, the entire tathāgata family makes offerings of flowers, lamps, incense, fragrances, and so on.
“Mañjuśrī, her rite is as follows.
Make an effigy from corpse ash and the saturated earth beneath it, and into its heart insert the name ending with the two sets of syllables.
Then recite this mantra: “oṁ māraya māraya | kāraya kāraya | stambhaya stambhaya | jambhaya jambhaya. | hūṁ hūṁ hūṁ | laṁ laṁ laṁ laṁ laṁ.
“Say that and then bury the effigy at a crossroads.”
This was the fourteenth chapter, “The Mother of All Tathāgatas.”
The Mother of the Jewel Family Chapter 15 “Mañjuśrī, the mother of the jewel family has four faces and eight hands. Her main face is dark blue, as is her youthful body. Her right face is white, her left face is red, and her rear face is yellow. Each is marked on its crown with the four families and has three eyes.
In her right hands she holds a jewel, an arrow, and a spear, while the lowermost hand is in the boon-granting gesture.
In her left hands she holds an utpala flower, a bow, and a vajra hook, and she wields a lasso while making the threatening gesture.
She sits in the vajra posture and is of dharmakāya nature.
“Mañjuśrī, this is her mantra: “namo ratna-trayāya | nama ārya-jñāna-sāgarāya ratnasambhava-vyūha-rājāya | tathāgatāya | arhate samyak-sambuddhāya | nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya | bodhisattvāya | mahāsattvāya | mahā-kāruṇikāya | tadyathā | oṁ tāre tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“With that, the entire jewel family make offerings of flowers, incense, lamps, and scented water.
“Mañjuśrī, her rite is as follows.
Mix together rotten rhododendron root, bugs born from manure, and two seeds.
Insert them into a clay amulet, and recite this mantra: “oṁ amukābhidhānam ākarṣaya ākarṣaya | amukīm mamepsitaṃ svapnaṃ kathaya hūṁ hrīḥ.
“If you then hide it under the bed, you will gain knowledge of good qualities and become steadfast.”
This was the fifteenth chapter, “The Mother of the Jewel Family.”
The Mother of the Karma Family Chapter 16 “Mañjuśrī, the mother of the karma family has four faces and eight hands. Her main face is green, and she is in the prime of youth. Her right face is white, her left face is red, and her rear face is green. Each is marked on its crown with the four families and has three eyes.
In her right hands she holds a sword, an arrow, and a spear, while the lowermost hand is in the boon-granting gesture.
In her left hands she holds an utpala flower, a bow, and a vajra hook, and she wields a lasso while making the threatening gesture.
She sits in the vajra posture and is of dharmakāya nature.
“Mañjuśrī, this is her mantra: “namo ratna-trayāya | nama ārya-jñāna-sāgarāya amoghasiddhi-vyūha-rājāya | tathāgatāya | arhate samyak-sambuddhāya | nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya | bodhisattvāya | mahāsattvāya | mahā-kāruṇikāya | tad-yathā | oṁ ture tuttāre svāhā.
“With that, the entire karma family makes offerings of flowers, incense, lamps, and scented water.
“Mañjuśrī, her rite summons all women in a way that leaves them free of jealousy. To perform it, mix together the eyes, tongue, and heart of a pigeon, cow bezoar, and silver ore. Make this mixture into pills with neem.
Then recite this mantra: “cala pracala śīghragāmiṇi devadattam uccāṭaya amukavasanaṃ muktaṃ kuru ānaya mahārihate hrīḥ svāhā.
“If you apply the substance while repeating this, all women will be drawn to you and brought under your influence, without any jealousy.”
This was the sixteenth chapter, “The Mother of the Karma Family.”
Fire Pūjā Chapter 17 Once these different types of rites had been taught, Youthful Mañjuśrī asked, “How should one earnestly perform the fire pūjā that completes all rites?”
The Blessed One replied, “Mañjuśrī, following these rites, a fire pūjā needs to be performed in order to bring them to fulfillment.
“To perform a fire pūjā for the first of the rites, the pacifying rite, do as follows. On the third day of the lunar month, build a small hut of the corresponding color and set out a white vajra.
For firewood, use the wood of white sandalwood trees and the like.
Light the fire, place an image before it, and incant rice, beautyberry, millet, and white sesame seeds with the following mantra, reciting it either seven or twenty-one times: “oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“Then throw the grains and seeds into the fire. Incant yogurt and milk with the mantra and offer them while saying śāntiṃ kuru.
Offer wood from a tree with milky sap, along with white butter, and say sarva-pāpam, and then render praise.
“Mañjuśrī, in a fire hut adorned with white flowers, light a fire of sandalwood or other such fragrant wood, and set an image in front of it.
Incant water and white mustard seeds with the mantra, and recite the following mantra while throwing them into the fire: “tadyathā | oṁ sarva-tathāgata | tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“And: “sarva-pāpaṃ śāntiṃ kuru svāhā.
“While chanting these, offer one hundred and eight handfuls of water.
“Mañjuśrī, the benefits of this are such that misdeeds, including the acts with immediate retribution, will be pacified, infectious diseases, harmful spirits, and the like will all be pacified, and you will recall all your past lives in each of your rebirths.
“Mañjuśrī, anoint the fire hut with the five substances from a cow, and in this odorous hut, burn an effigy made of wax while reciting this mantra: “oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
“Once it has been burned, the target will be overpowered or even annihilated.”
This was the seventeenth chapter, “Fire Pūjā.”
The Protective Circle for Pacifying Rites Chapter 18 The Blessed One then smiled and taught Youthful Mañjuśrī the procedures for the circles.
“In a circle with nine compartments, write oṁ and hā with the target’s name in between.
Use the words rakṣaḥ rakṣaḥ for protection.
In the surrounding compartments, write oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā, with svāhā written between each syllable.
Written on birch bark with saffron and then fastened to the upper arm, this serves as the best protection.”
This was the eighteenth chapter, “The Protective Circle for Pacifying Rites.”
The Protective Circle for Enthralling Rites Chapter 19 “For protection during enthralling rites, write oṁ and hā, with the target’s name in between, within a nine-compartment circle.
Use the words rakṣaḥ rakṣaḥ for protection.
In the surrounding compartments, write tāre tuttāre ture svāhā, with the syllable mu between each of those syllables.
Write this on red birch bark with lac dye and fasten it to the navel so that it cannot be seen. This will be the best protection and will enthrall.”
This was the nineteenth chapter, “The Protective Circle for Enthralling Rites.”
The Protective Circle for Increasing Rites Chapter 20 “For protection during increasing rites, make an eight-spoked wheel and write oṁ tāre tuttāre ture on each of the eight spokes.
In the center, write the target’s name appended with svāhā along with rakṣaḥ rakṣaḥ.
Write it on birch bark with saffron and then fasten it to the upper arm or neck, and it will be the best protection.”
This was the twentieth chapter, “The Protective Circle for Increasing Rites.”
A More Elaborate Protective Circle for Increasing Rites Chapter 21 “For a protective circle that guards against all obstacles, use a triple-rimmed circle with eight compartments in the outermost circle.
In its central compartment write svāhā appended to the target’s name along with rakṣaḥ.
In the innermost rim, write u u u u u u u u.
In the outer, eight-compartment rim, write oṁ tāre ture tuttāre, bracketing each syllable with u. Draw this with saffron on birch bark or other bark. Tie it to the crown of the head or under the arm so that people cannot see it, and one will be freed from all harm.
Recite the mantra as many times as you can.”
This was the twenty-first chapter, “A More Elaborate Protective Circle for Increasing Rites.”
The Magical Protective Circle for Great Pacification Chapter 22 “Now for the circle that accomplishes all activities, on birch bark or cloth, draw a circle with nine compartments using water infused with white sandalwood.
In the outermost rim, write a ā i ī u ū e ai o au ṛ ṝ ḷ ḹ aṃ aḥ.
In the inner rim, write tāre tuttāre ture svāhā.
Write rakṣaḥ śāntiṃ kuru svāhā between oṁ and hā in the upper part of the circle, and reverse the mantra in the lower part of the circle.
Know that the vowels on the outside are to be reversed.
In the center, write rakṣaḥ śāntiṃ kuru between oṁ and hā.”
This was the twenty-second chapter, “The Magical Protective Circle for Great Pacification.”
The Pacifying Circle Chapter 23 “Next are the circles for the individual rites of the four activities. For pacifying, make a clay amulet with a lid, bake it, and color it white.
Inside it, draw a circle with nine compartments.
The mantra oṁ tāre tuttāre ture should be written in the eight surrounding panels as follows: ru ru oṁ ru ru | ru ru tā ru ru | ru ru re ru ru | ru ru tut ru ru | ru ru tā ru ru | ru ru re ru ru | ru ru tu ru ru | ru ru re ru ru.
In the central compartment, write kuru śāntiṃ kuru svāhā.
Close the amulet and place it, along with a white thread, on the maṇḍala. If you then worship at the three times with white flowers and the five kinds of offerings, the pacification will succeed.”
This was the twenty-third chapter, “The Pacifying Circle.”
Great Pacification Chapter 24 “To accomplish the activity of great pacification, make a clay amulet with a lid. Make ink out of white sandalwood and use it to draw a nine-compartment circle with inner and outer sections.
In the central compartment write the mantra svā śāntiṃ kuru hā.
Inside the inner rim, write eight sets of a a.
Inside the outer rim, write a oṁ a | a tā a | a re a | a tut a | a tā a | a re a | a tu a | a re a.
Tie a flower garland around the amulet and place it on the maṇḍala. Make offerings to it at the four times and recite the mantra without error for seven days. If you do, the great pacification will succeed.”
This was the twenty-fourth chapter, “Great Pacification.”
The Increasing Circle Chapter 25 “To perform the increasing rite, draw a nine-compartment circle with an inner and outer rim on birch bark, using either saffron or bezoar.
In the central compartment write sarvapuṣṭiṃ kuru oṁ a, and in each of the eight inner compartments, write oṁ.
In the eight outer compartments, write oṁ oṁ oṁ | oṁ tā oṁ | oṁ re oṁ | oṁ tut oṁ | oṁ tā oṁ | oṁ re oṁ | oṁ tu oṁ | oṁ re oṁ.
Then place the circle inside a clay amulet and worship it with yellow flowers, such as the nāga flower, and the five offerings at the four times each day for seven days, starting on the full moon. Your lifespan and merit will thereby be increased.”
This was the twenty-fifth chapter, “The Increasing Circle.”
The Forceful Enthralling Circle Chapter 26 “If you wish to enthrall, draw a circle with nine compartments on a rhinoceros hide or an amulet using pigment made of the extracts of the bark of areca, cutch, and caragana trees.
In the central compartment of the circle write the mantra a svā ca amogha a hrīḥ hā.
In the eight compartments write a oṁ a | a tā a | a re a | a tut a | a tā a | a re a | a tu a | a re a.
Then, place it inside a skull cup covered with a lid, and bind it with blue thread.
When the moon is full, worship it during the four times using red flowers and the five offerings. If you do, everything will be enthralled.”
This was the twenty-sixth chapter, “The Forceful Enthralling Circle.”
The Isolating and Enthralling Circle Chapter 27 “To enthrall, use blood from your ring finger, lac dye, charnel-ground charcoal, and gold to draw a circle with nine compartments on a charnel-ground shroud or the clothes of a dead person.
In its central compartment write amogha hrīḥ ha.
On the eight spokes, write oṁ de oṁ | tā va tā | re dat re | tut ta tut | tā a tā | re mo re | tu gha tu | re hriḥ re.
Insert the circle into an amulet along with the head of a worm.
Breaking it in two, conceal each part on opposite sides of a riverbank.
If you do that, isolating and enthralling will be accomplished.”
This was the twenty-seventh chapter, “The Isolating and Enthralling Circle.”
The Banishing Circle Chapter 28 “If you wish to banish, use a mixture of the goat poison plant, blood, and indigo to draw two circles with nine compartments on a charnel-ground shroud.
In the central compartment write ha sa u ca ha ha ha, and in the eight surrounding compartments write ha oṁ ha | ha tā ha | ha re ha | ha tut ha | ha tā ha | ha re ha | ha tu ha | ha re ha.
Place the circle into a skull cup covered with a lid, bind it with blue thread, and conceal it in a charnel ground.
The banishment will then be successful.” This was the twenty-eight chapter, on the banishing circle.
The Isolating Circle Chapter 29 “To make an isolating circle, use ink made from a mixture of equal parts of charnel-ground charcoal, crow blood, owl blood, and poison to draw nine compartments with an inner and outer circle. In the central compartment write phaṭ svā devadatta hā phaṭ.
In the eight inner compartments write phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ.
In the eight outer compartments write phaṭ oṁ phaṭ | phaṭ tā phaṭ | phaṭ re phaṭ | phaṭ tut phaṭ | phaṭ tā phaṭ | phaṭ re phaṭ | phaṭ tu phaṭ | phaṭ re phaṭ.
Place it in a crow and owl egg and conceal it at the base of a waterfall. Isolating will thereby be successful.”
This was the twenty-ninth chapter, “The Isolating Circle.”
The Slaying Circle Chapter 30 “The circle for slaying is as follows.
Use a mixture of equal parts of poison, blood, and mustard seed to draw a nine-compartment circle with inner and outer sections.
In the central compartment write hūṁ svā māraya hā phaṭ.
In the inner compartments write hūṁ phaṭ hūṁ | phaṭ hūṁ phaṭ | hūṁ phaṭ hūṁ | phaṭ hūṁ phaṭ | hūṁ phaṭ hūṁ | phaṭ hūṁ phaṭ | hūṁ phaṭ hūṁ | phaṭ hūṁ phaṭ.
In the outer compartments write hūṁ oṁ phaṭ | hūṁ tā phaṭ | hūṁ re phaṭ | hūṁ tut phaṭ | hūṁ tā phaṭ | hūṁ re phaṭ | hūṁ tu phaṭ | hūṁ re phaṭ.
Write these on the skull of a childless man or woman, repeat the mantra many times, and then hide it in a charnel ground. If you do so, death will ensue.”
This was the thirtieth chapter, “The Slaying Circle.”
The Insanity-Inducing Circle Chapter 31 “To make a circle that will induce insanity, use water infused with datura to draw a nine-compartment circle with inner and outer sections on cloth or paper.
In the central compartment write ha ha devadatta ha ha.
In the inner compartments write hha hha hha hha hha hha hha hha.
In the eight outer compartments write hha oṁ hha | hha tā hha | hha re hha | hha tut hha | hha tā hha | hha re hha | hha tu hha | hha re hha.
Place the circle into a grass amulet and recite the mantra as fast as you can.
Then conceal it at a crossroads and pile datura on it. Insanity will then be induced.
To relieve the insanity, wash an effigy with butter, honey, and cow’s milk. The target will thereby recover.”
This was the thirty-first chapter, “The Insanity-Inducing Circle.” The Suppressing Circle Chapter 32 “The circle that suppresses is as follows.
Draw a nine-compartment circle on slate.
In the central compartment, use water infused with turmeric to write ga svā stambhaya | stambhaya ga hā.
In the eight compartments, write ga oṁ ga | ga tā ga | ga re ga | ga tut ga | ga tā ga | ga re ga | ga tu ga | ga re ga.
If the circle is folded and hidden at a crossroads, the target will be unable to move.”
This was the thirty-second chapter, on the suppressing circle.
The Great Suppression Circle Chapter 33 “For the great suppression circle, use ink made of turmeric to draw nine compartments with inner and outer circles inside a clay amulet.
In the central compartment write this mantra: ṛga svā staṃbhaya staṃbhaya ṛga hā.
In the inner compartments write ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha eight times.
In the eight outer compartments write ṛga oṁ ṛga | ṛga tā ṛga | ṛga re ṛga | ṛga tut ṛga | ṛga tā ṛga | ṛga re ṛga | ṛga tu ṛga | ṛga re ṛga and finalize it with the addition of the Ārya Tārā mantra.
Conceal it in the direction from which the enemy is approaching, and it will grant protection. If you conceal it by the enemy’s door, they will be suppressed.”
This was the thirty-third chapter, “The Circle That Suppresses Enemies.”
The Circle That Suppresses the Sorcery of Vidyā-Mantra Chapter 34 “To make the circle that suppresses the sorcery of vidyā-mantra, draw the circle—a nine-compartment circle with inner and outer sections—with liquid turmeric on two slabs of either slate or mica.
As for the mantras, in the central compartment write va svā staṃbhaya staṃbhaya hā.
In the inner section write va va va va va va va va.
In the outer section write va oṁ va | va tā va | va re va | va tut va | va tā va | va re va | va tu va | va re va.
Then conceal the two circles separately, side by side, and the sorcery of vidyā-mantra will be suppressed.”
This was the thirty-fourth chapter, “Suppressing the Sorcery of Vidyā-Mantra.”
Teaching the Samayas and Vows Chapter 35 The bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī then scattered an inconceivable array of flowers—mandārava flowers, lotuses, water lilies, and many others—over the Blessed One, while a symphony of divine music resounded.
He asked the Blessed One, “How are the samayas to be fulfilled?”
The Blessed One replied: “Those who maintain their respective samayas And are connected to the circle of deities Should abandon the killing of beings, Not take what is not given, “Not frequent women or abuse them, Avoid all types of lies, Relinquish intoxicants, meat, And all types of stealing, “Cast aside lustful attitudes Toward each and every woman, And show them benevolent respect As if they were one’s own mother.
“For those who maintain these samaya commitments, All rites will be effective.”
Thus spoke the Blessed One.
This was the thirty-fifth chapter, “Teaching the Samayas and Vows.”
The Conclusion Chapter 36 The vast gathering of countless gods—including the lord of gods Indra, Brahmā, and others—the bodhisattva Youthful Mañjuśrī, a countless retinue of other bodhisattvas, and the world with its gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
This completes “The Tantra on All Rites of Blessed Lady Tārā.”
Translated by the Indian preceptor Dharmaśrīmitra and the Tibetan translator and monk Chökyi Sangpo.

