

The Noble Marvelous Dharma Discourse 
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Blessed One was staying in Rājagṛha at the Bamboo Grove in the Kalandakanivāpa.
One morning, the venerable Ānanda donned his Dharma robe and lower garment, took up his alms bowl, and went into Rājagṛha on his alms round.
As he was making his alms round through the city of Rājagṛha, the venerable Ānanda noticed, in a certain direction, a multistoried palace with eighty gateways.
It was plastered inside and out; parasols, banners, and pennants were hoisted; and it was adorned with many silken tassels.
Seeing this, the venerable Ānanda thought, “If a faithful son or daughter of good family were to construct such a building and offer it to the saṅgha of monks in the four directions, or if someone were to erect for a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit, provide it with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a jujube leaf, commission a statue the size of a grain of barley, and place in there a relic the size of a mustard seed, which of these two would have the greater merit?”
Then it occurred to the venerable Ānanda, “Since the Teacher is here with me, the Well-Gone One is here with me, I should ask the Blessed One to clarify this matter.
As the Blessed One explains it, so I will remember it.”
Then the venerable Ānanda completed his alms rounds in the city of Rājagṛha and finished his meal.
Since he was abstaining from accepting subsequent alms food, he put away his Dharma robe and alms bowl.
He then washed his feet and went to see the Blessed One.
Once there, he prostrated at the Blessed One’s feet and sat down to one side.
Seated to one side, the venerable Ānanda addressed the Blessed One: “Honorable One, earlier this morning, I donned my Dharma robe and lower garment, took up my alms bowl, and went into Rājagṛha on my alms round.
As I went from one house to the next collecting alms in the city of Rājagṛha, I saw, in a certain direction, a multistoried palace with eighty gateways.
It was plastered inside and out; parasols, banners, and pennants were hoisted; and it was adorned with many silken tassels.
Seeing this, I thought to myself, ‘If a faithful son or daughter of good family were to offer such a building to the saṅgha in the four directions, or if someone were to erect for a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha, who has passed into parinirvāṇa, a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit made of clay, provide it with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a jujube leaf, commission a statue the size of a grain of barley, and place in there a relic the size of a mustard seed, which of these two would have the greater merit?’
Then it occurred to me, ‘Since the Teacher is here with me, the Well-Gone One is here with me, I should ask the Blessed One to clarify this matter.
As the Blessed One explains it, so I will remember it.’
If I make this request to the Blessed One, may the Blessed One instruct me thoroughly on this matter by virtue of his compassionate mind.”
When this request was thus made, the Blessed One replied to the venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, you are dedicated to the welfare of many beings.
It is for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans that you ask the Thus-Gone One about this issue.
Excellent! Excellent!
Therefore, Ānanda, listen well and keep this in mind. I will explain.
“Ānanda, the continent of Jambudvīpa is seven thousand leagues in length and width.
In the north it is expansive.
To the south, it has the shape of an axe.
If it were made of the seven precious substances and a faithful son or daughter of good family were to offer it to all stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, pratyekabuddhas, and the saṅgha in the four directions, or if someone were to erect for a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha, who has passed into parinirvāṇa, a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit made of clay, provide it with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a jujube leaf, commission a statue the size of a grain of barley, and place in there a relic the size of a mustard seed, I say, Ānanda, the merit of this one would be far greater than the former.
“Ānanda, leave aside the continent of Jambudvīpa.
There is, Ānanda, an eastern continent named Pūrvavideha.
It is eight thousand leagues in length and width and it is shaped like a crescent.
If it were made of the seven precious substances and a faithful son or daughter of good family were to offer it to all stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, pratyekabuddhas, and the saṅgha in the four directions, or if someone were to create for a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha, who has passed into parinirvāṇa, a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit made of clay, provide it with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a jujube leaf, commission a statue the size of a grain of barley, and place in there a relic the size of a mustard seed, I say, Ānanda, the merit of this one would be far greater than the former.
“Ānanda, leave aside the continent of Jambudvīpa and the eastern continent of Pūrvavideha.
There is, Ānanda, a continent named Avaragodānīya.
It is nine thousand leagues in length and width and it is shaped like a full moon.
If it were made of the seven precious substances and a faithful son or daughter of good family were to offer it to the all stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, pratyekabuddhas, and the saṅgha in the four directions, or if someone were to create for a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha, who has passed into parinirvāṇa, a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit made of clay, provide it with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a jujube leaf, commission a statue the size of a grain of barley, and place in there a relic the size of a mustard seed, I say, Ānanda, the merit of this one would be far greater than the former.
“Ānanda leave aside the continent of Jambudvīpa, the eastern continent of Pūrvavideha, and the western continent of Avaragodānīya.
There is, Ānanda, a continent named Uttarakuru.
It is ten thousand leagues in length and width and is entirely square.
If it were made of the seven precious substances and a faithful son or daughter of good family were to offer it to all stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, pratyekabuddhas, and the saṅgha in the four directions, or if someone were to create for a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha, who has passed into parinirvāṇa, a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit made of clay, provide it with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a jujube leaf, commission a statue the size of a grain of barley, and place in there a relic the size of a mustard seed, I say, Ānanda, the merit of this one would be far greater than the former.
“Ānanda, leave aside the continent of Jambudvīpa, the eastern continent of Pūrvavideha, the western continent of Avaragodānīya, and the northern continent of Uttarakuru.
There is, Ānanda, the palace of Śakra, the lord of the gods, named Vaijayanta.
If it were made of the seven precious substances and a faithful son or daughter of good family were to offer it to all stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, pratyekabuddhas, and the saṅgha in the four directions, or if someone were to create for a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha, who has passed into parinirvāṇa, a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit made from clay, provide it with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a jujube leaf, commission a statue the size of a grain of barley, and place in there a relic the size of a mustard seed, I say, Ānanda, the merit of this one would be far greater than the former.
“Ānanda, leave aside the continent of Jambudvīpa, the eastern continent of Pūrvavideha, the western continent of Avaragodānīya, the northern continent of Uttarakuru, and the palace of Śakra, the lord of the gods, named Vaijayanta.
There is, Ānanda, the three-thousandfold universe.
If it were made of the seven precious substances and a faithful son or daughter of good family were to offer it to all the stream enterers, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, pratyekabuddhas, and the saṅgha in the four directions, or if someone were to create for a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha, who has passed into parinirvāṇa, a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit made of clay, provide it with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a jujube leaf, commission a statue the size of a grain of barley, and place in there a relic the size of a mustard seed, I say, Ānanda, the merit of this one would be far greater than the former.
“Why is this so?
Ānanda, it is because a thus-gone one has immeasurable generosity, immeasurable discipline, immeasurable patience, immeasurable effort, immeasurable concentration, immeasurable insight, immeasurable loving-kindness, immeasurable compassion, immeasurable joy, and immeasurable equanimity.
Ānanda, possessing the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha, the ten powers of a thus-gone one, and the four types of fearlessness, a thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect buddha is endowed with immeasurable qualities.”
When the Blessed One had spoken, the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One, “Blessed One, this Dharma discourse is indeed marvelous!
O Well-Gone One, it is marvelous!
What is the name of this Dharma discourse?
How should it be remembered?”
The Buddha replied, “Ānanda, know this Dharma discourse as The Marvelous Dharma Discourse.
Hence, designate this marvelous Dharma discourse as The Marvelous Dharma Discourse.”
The Blessed One having instructed thus, the monks and the venerable Ānanda rejoiced and thoroughly praised what the Blessed One had said.
This concludes “The Noble Marvelous Dharma Discourse.”
It was edited and finalized by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Surendrabodhi, as well as the great translator Bandé Yeshé Dé.

