
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light 

Chapter 1: The Introduction 
I pay homage to all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, and noble śrāvakas in the past, future, and present.
Thus did I hear at one time.
The Tathāgata was dwelling On Vulture Peak, in the Dharma realm, The profound buddha field of activity.
He taught this Sublime Golden Light— Which is the lord king of sūtras— To the supreme bodhisattvas, Who are pure and immaculate.
It is profound to listen to And profound to analyze.
It has received the blessings Of the buddhas in the four directions: The Buddha Akṣobhya in the east, The Buddha Ratnaketu in the south, The Buddha Amitābha in the west, And the Buddha Dundubhisvara in the north.
“I will teach that which is blessed, Which is a teaching of supreme auspiciousness, In order to eliminate all bad actions.
“It will bestow every happiness; It will eliminate all suffering.
It is the basis of omniscience, And it is adorned by every splendor.
“Beings with impaired faculties, Whose lives are in decline and ending; Those who are beset by misfortune, Who have been forsaken by the devas, “Who are hated by their spouses and other people, Who are tormented by family and servants, Who are in conflict with others, And who are oppressed by loss of wealth; “Those who are miserable, tired, and ruined, Who are frightened and in distress, Who are oppressed by planets and lunar asterisms, And who are afflicted by dreadful demons; “And those who see evil in their dreams Arising from misery and fatigue Should wash themselves clean And listen to this supreme sūtra.
“For those who listen to this sūtra, This profound field of the buddhas, With a lucid mind and good motivation, And dressed in clean clothes— “For all those beings All those dreadful misfortunes Will always come to an end Through the brilliance of this sūtra.
“The guardians of the world themselves And their ministers and army generals, As well as a multitude of millions of yakṣas, Will be their protectors.
“The great goddess Sarasvatī And Nairañjana­vasinī, Hārītī, the mother of spirits, And Dṛḍhā, the goddess of the earth; “The lords of Brahmā devas, lords of the devas; The greatly powerful lords of the nāgas; And the lords of the kinnaras, the lords of the asuras, And similarly the lords of the garuḍas “Will come to the place where those people are, Accompanied by troops and steeds, And will be their protectors, Attentive day and night.
“I will elucidate this sūtra, Which is the profound field of the buddhas, Which is the secret of all buddhas, And which is difficult to obtain in a million eons.
“Those who hear this sūtra And cause others to hear it, And those who rejoice in this sūtra, And those who make offerings to it, “Throughout millions of eons Will themselves receive offerings From devas, nāgas, and humans, And from kinnaras, asuras, and yakṣas.
“For beings who create this merit, There will arise for them An infinite, incalculable, Inconceivable mass of merit.
“They will be taken into the care Of the perfect buddhas in the ten directions, And similarly by the bodhisattvas Who have profound activity.
“Having put on clean clothes, Wearing perfumed clothing, And having a loving mind, They should offer without distraction.
“They should make their Own minds pure and vast, And with minds filled with faith, They should listen to this sublime sūtra.
“Those who listen to this sūtra Will be welcomed among humans, Will attain an excellent human existence, And will live happy lives.
“Those in whose ears This teaching sounds Will plant good roots And be praised by many buddhas.”
This concludes “The Introduction,” the first chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 2: The Teaching on the Lifespan of the Tathāgata Also, at that time, there dwelled in the great city of Rājagṛha a bodhisattva mahāsattva by the name of Ruciraketu.
He had served past jinas, had developed roots of merit, and had attended upon many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddhas.
He thought, “Through what causes and what conditions does the Bhagavat Śākyamuni have such a short lifespan of eighty years?”
Then he thought, “The Bhagavat has said, ‘There are two causes and two conditions for a long life.
What are those two?
Forsaking killing and giving food.’
The Bhagavat Śākyamuni has forsaken killing and has correctly adopted the path of the ten good actions for countless hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons.
He has given external and internal substances as food to beings, even to the extent of satisfying hungry beings with his own body, blood, bones, and limbs, to say nothing of every other kind of food.”
When that sublime being’s mind had thought this, with his attention focused upon the Buddha, his house became immense, vast, and made of blue beryl.
It was adorned by many divine jewels, its color transformed by the Tathāgata, and it was pervaded by a perfume that transcended the divine.
In the four directions of that house there appeared four thrones made of divine jewels.
The thrones were overspread with layers of precious, divine cloth decorated with divine jewels.
Upon those thrones appeared divine lotus flowers, their colors transformed by the Tathāgata, and adorned by many jewels.
Upon those lotuses there appeared the four buddha bhagavats.
To the east appeared the Tathāgata Akṣobhya.
To the south appeared the Tathāgata Ratnaketu.
To the west appeared the Tathāgata Amitāyus.
To the north appeared the Tathāgata Dundubhisvara.
At the moment when those buddha bhagavats appeared upon those lion thrones, the great city of Rājagṛha was filled by a great illuminating light that spread throughout the trichiliocosm world realm, throughout as many world realms in the ten directions as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River.
A rain of flowers fell.
There came the sound of divine music.
Through the power of the Buddha, all beings in this trichiliocosm world realm gained divine happiness.
The blind saw forms with their eyes; the deaf heard sounds with their ears; the insane gained their sanity; those with distracted minds became undistracted; the naked became clothed; the hungry had their stomachs filled; the thirsty had their thirst quenched; beings afflicted by illness were healed; and those with impaired physical faculties became possessed of complete faculties.
In those worlds there appeared vast, astonishing, wonderful qualities.
The bodhisattva Ruciraketu was amazed to see those buddha bhagavats, and, filled with joy, delighted, elated, pleased, and happy, with his palms together in homage, he bowed toward those buddha bhagavats.
Mindful of those buddha bhagavats and mindful of the qualities of the Buddha Bhagavat Śākyamuni, he had doubts concerning the lifespan of the Bhagavat Śākyamuni.
In his mind was the thought, “Why is it that the Bhagavat Śākyamuni has this short lifespan of eighty years?”
Those buddha bhagavats were aware of and understood these thoughts and said to the bodhisattva Ruciraketu, “Noble son, do not think, ‘The Bhagavat Śākyamuni has such a short lifespan.’
Why is that?
Noble son, except for the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddhas, we do not see anyone in the world with its devas, with its Māra, with its Brahmā, with its many beings who are mendicants and brahmins, and with its devas, humans, and asuras who has the ability to know the length of the Bhagavat Tathāgata Śākyamuni’s lifespan to its future limit.”
As soon as those buddha bhagavats described the Tathāgata’s lifespan, at that moment, through the power of the buddhas, the devas in the desire realm, the devas in the form realm, the nāgas, the yakṣas, the gandharvas, the asuras, the garuḍas, the kinnaras, the mahoragas, and the many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of assembled bodhisattvas arrived in the house of the bodhisattva Ruciraketu.
Those tathāgatas then recited verses that taught in brief the lifespan of the Bhagavat Śākyamuni to that complete assembly: “The drops of water in all The oceans can be calculated, But no one can calculate The lifespan of Śākyamuni.
“The number of atoms in all Sumerus can be calculated, But no one can calculate The lifespan of Śākyamuni.
“Someone might calculate The number of atoms in the earth, But no one can calculate The entire lifespan of the Jina.
“Someone might calculate The extent of space, But no one can calculate The lifespan of Śākyamuni.
“One cannot reach a number By saying that the perfect Buddha Will remain for this number of eons Or for a hundred million eons.
“This is because of two causes And because of two conditions: He has forsaken violence toward others, And he has given food numerous times.
“Therefore, the length of the great being’s Lifespan cannot be calculated By saying it is a certain number of eons, Or likewise by saying it is countless eons.
“Therefore, do not doubt, do not have any doubt whatsoever.
No one can conceive of the final extent of a jina’s lifespan.”
At that time, in that assembly, there was the Kauṇḍinya brahmin, the Dharma master Vyākaraṇa, who, together with countless thousands of brahmins, had made offerings to the Bhagavat.
On hearing these words concerning the great nirvāṇa of the Tathāgata, he immediately wept, bowed down to the feet of the Bhagavat, and said to the Bhagavat, “If you have love for all beings, if you have great compassion, if you wish to benefit all beings, if you are a mother and father for all beings, if you are unequaled, if you are like the moon radiating light, if you are like a risen sun of great wisdom and knowledge, and if you look upon all beings as you do upon Rāhula, then I pray that you grant me something sacred.”
The Bhagavat remained silent.
Then, through the power of the Buddha, there arose confident eloquence in a Licchavī youth in that assembly, whose name was Sarva­sattva­priyadarśana.
He asked the Kauṇḍinya brahmin, the Dharma master Vyākaraṇa, “Great brahmin, why do you ask the Bhagavat for something sacred?
I will give you something sacred.”
“Licchavī youth,” said the brahmin, “I wish for a relic of the Bhagavat the size of a mustard seed in order to make offerings to the Bhagavat.
It is known that if one makes offerings to a relic the size of a mustard seed that one has received as a share of the ashes that are the relics of the Bhagavat, one will become the sole lord of the devas of Trāyastriṃśa.
“O Licchavī youth, it is difficult for śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas to know The Sūtra of the Sublime Golden Light.
It is difficult for them to comprehend it. The Sūtra of the Sublime Golden Light, which has those characteristics and qualities, is going to be spoken, so listen!
“O Licchavī youth, The Sūtra of the Sublime Golden Light is thus difficult to know and difficult to understand.
Therefore, it is appropriate that we brahmins from an outlying island should keep a relic the size of a mustard seed in a casket, for by possessing it, beings will soon become lords of Trāyastriṃśa.
“O Licchavī youth, don’t you want to request a relic the size of a mustard seed from the Tathāgata, place the relic in a casket, and possess it so that beings will become lords of Trāyastriṃśa?
“O Licchavī youth, that is the sublime thing that I have requested.”
Then Sarva­sattva­priyadarśana, the Licchavī youth, recited these verses to the Kauṇḍinya brahmin, the Dharma master Vyākaraṇa: “When flowers grow On the Ganges River, Crows become red, And cuckoos become conch-colored; “When palm-tree fruit grow on rose-apple trees; And when bunches of mangoes grow on date trees, That will be the time when a relic The size of a mustard seed will appear.
“When clothes made from The hair of turtles are worn, And they dispel the cold of winter, Then there will be a relic.
“When roofs are made From the legs of flies And are solid and stable, Then there will be a relic.
“When all the leeches Grow teeth that are Long, white, and sharp, Then there will be a relic.
“When a ladder is built From the horns of hares For climbing to the upper realms, Then there will be a relic.
“When a mouse climbs that ladder And then eats the moon And attacks Rāhu, Then there will be a relic.
“When a village-dwelling fly Drinks a pitcher of beer And lives in a house, Then there will be a relic.
“When a happy donkey Has lips as red as a bimba fruit And is expert in song and dance, Then there will be a relic.
“When owls and crows Cavort together in private And live together in harmony, Then there will be a relic.
“When the leaves of the palash tree Become a parasol of three kinds of jewels And provide shelter from the falling rain, Then there will be a relic.
“When a great oceangoing ship, With its instruments and sails, Comes onto and travels over dry land, Then there will be a relic.
“When an owl picks up Gandhamādana Mountain In its beak and flies away, Then there will be a relic.”
On hearing those verses, the Kauṇḍinya brahmin, the Dharma master Vyākaraṇa, replied to the Licchavī youth Sarva­sattva­priyadarśana with these verses: “Good!
Good!
Best of youths, Son of the jinas, with great words, Skilled in methods, heroic, Who has received the highest prophecy, “Young man, listen to me describe, In order the inconceivable Greatness of the world’s lord, The protector, the Tathāgata.
“The scope of the buddhas is inconceivable.
The tathāgatas are without any equal.
All buddhas are always in peace.
All buddhas appear perfectly.
“All buddhas have the same color; That is the intrinsic nature of the buddhas.
The Bhagavat is not fabricated, And the Tathāgata is not produced.
“He has a body like a vajra.
He manifests an illusory body.
The great Ṛṣi does not have relics, Not even of the size of a mustard seed.
“How could there be relics From a body without bones or blood?
Relics are left through skillful methods In order to bring benefit to beings.
“The perfect Buddha is a Dharma body.
The Tathāgata is a Dharma realm.
That is what the Bhagavat’s body is like. That is what teaching the Dharma is like.
“I made that request for the sacred object, Having already heard and understood that.
I spoke in that way In order to reveal the truth.”
Then thirty-two thousand devas, having heard that profound teaching on the lifespan of the Tathāgata, all developed the aspiration for the highest, most complete enlightenment.
With joyful mental thoughts and with one voice, they recited these verses: “The Buddha does not pass away.
The Dharma does not disappear.
Passing into nirvāṇa is manifested In order to bring beings to maturity.
“The Bhagavat is inconceivable; The Tathāgata’s body is eternal.
He demonstrates a variety of displays In order to bring benefit to beings.”
Then the bodhisattva Ruciraketu, having heard the teaching on the lifespan of the Bhagavat Śākyamuni from both those buddha bhagavats and those excellent individuals, was filled with joy, delighted, elated, pleased, and happy—he was pervaded by great happiness and delight.
When this teaching on the lifespan of the tathāgatas was taught, innumerable, countless beings developed the aspiration for the highest, most complete enlightenment, and those tathāgatas vanished.
This concludes “The Teaching on the Lifespan of the Tathāgata,” the second chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 3: The Dream The bodhisattva Ruciraketu then went to sleep and in a dream saw a golden drum that was shining brightly like the disk of the sun.
In all directions, there were countless, innumerable buddha bhagavats seated upon precious beryl thrones at the foot of precious trees, encircled by assemblies of many hundreds of thousands.
Looking straight ahead, they were teaching the Dharma.
Then he saw a person who appeared to be a brahmin beating that drum, and he heard a teaching in verse come from the drumbeats.
As soon as the bodhisattva Ruciraketu awoke from his sleep, he remembered the verses that were taught.
Having remembered them, when the night was over, he left the city of Rājagṛha, and together with many thousands of people he went to Vulture Peak Mountain and into the presence of the Bhagavat.
He bowed down to the feet of the Bhagavat and circumambulated the Bhagavat three times, keeping him to his right, and then sat down to one side.
Seated to one side, the bodhisattva Ruciraketu, with his palms together in homage, bowed toward the Bhagavat and recited the teaching in verse that he had heard from the sound of the drum in his dream.
This concludes “The Dream,” the third chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 4: The Confession “One night, though I was not Sleepy, I entered a dream.
I saw a large, beautiful drum Entirely of golden light.
“It was shining like the sun And completely bright, Illuminating the ten directions.
I saw buddhas everywhere, “Seated beneath precious trees On precious beryl thrones, Looking straight ahead in the middle Of many hundreds of thousands of followers.
“I saw someone resembling a brahmin Who beat that big drum.
As he was beating it, There came these verses: “ ‘Through the sound of the great drum of sublime golden light, May all the suffering of the lower existences, The suffering in Yama’s realm, and the suffering of poverty Cease in the three realms within this trichiliocosm.
“ ‘Through the sound and words of the great drum, May all the ignorance in the world cease; Just as the lord of sages is without fear and his fear has ceased, So may all beings be without fear and have their fears cease.
“ ‘Just like the omniscient lord of sages in saṃsāra Possesses all the qualities of the āryas, In that way, may beings become oceans of qualities, Possessing the qualities of the aspects of enlightenment.
“ ‘Through the sound and words of the great drum, May all beings possess the voice of Brahmā And reach the supreme enlightenment of Sublime buddhahood and turn the good Dharma wheel.
“ ‘May they remain for countless eons.
May they teach the Dharma to benefit beings.
May they defeat the kleśas and dispel suffering.
May desire, anger, and ignorance cease.
“ ‘Those beings who are in the lower realms, Whose skeleton bodies are burning in fire, May they hear the sound of the great drum And hear the words, “Homage to the buddhas!”
“ ‘May all beings remember hundreds of lifetimes— Thousands of millions of lifetimes.
May they always remember the Munīndra, And may they hear his vast teaching.
“ ‘Through the sound and words of the great drum, May they always be together with buddhas And completely forsake bad actions.
May they accomplish good actions.
“ ‘May the sound of the great drum Completely bring to fulfillment Whatever wishes and prayers are made By humans, devas, and all beings.
“ ‘May the fires be extinguished For the beings born in the terrible hells, Where their bodies burn completely in fire, And they wander in anguish without a savior.
“ ‘May the sound of the great drum Bring an end to the sufferings of those beings Who are experiencing intense, unendurable suffering In the hells, among the pretas, and in the human world.
“ ‘For those who have no support, No protection, and no refuge, May there be protection and support, And may there be the supreme refuge.
“ ‘The buddhas, the supreme among two-legged beings, Who have minds of love and compassion, Who are in the worlds in the ten directions, I pray that you turn your regard upon me.
“ ‘The extremely dreadful bad actions That I have carried out in the past, I confess all of them in the presence Of those who have the ten strengths.
“ ‘Whatever bad actions I have done, Such as ignoring my mother and father, Not acknowledging the buddhas, And not acknowledging good actions; “ ‘Whatever bad actions I have done, Such as being arrogant with pride in my wealth, And arrogant with pride in my family, My possessions, and my youth; “ ‘Whatever bad thoughts, bad words, And harmful actions I have produced; Whatever bad actions I have done, Not viewing them as being harmful; “ ‘Whatever bad actions I have done Through foolishness of mind, My mind being darkened by ignorance, Or being under the influence of bad friends, “ ‘Or through my mind being disturbed by kleśas, Because of delighting in amusements, Or through being in misery, being ill, Or through the evil of dissatisfaction with wealth; “ ‘Whatever bad actions I have done Because of associating with ignoble beings, Or caused by my jealousy and miserliness, Or by my dishonesty and neediness; “ ‘Whatever bad actions I have done During the times when I was in misfortune, Or through fears concerning my desires, Or when I was parted from my wealth; “ ‘Whatever bad actions I have done Under the power of a deceitful mind, Under the power of desire and anger, Or because of hunger and thirst; “ ‘Whatever bad actions I have done For the sake of food and drink, For the sake of women and clothes, Or from being tormented by various kleśas— “ ‘The bad actions of body, speech, and mind, My accumulation of those three kinds of bad conduct, Whatever I have done of that kind, I make a confession of it all.
“ ‘I make a confession of all Disrespect I have shown To the buddhas, the Dharma, And likewise to the śrāvakas.
“ ‘I make a confession of all Disrespect I have shown To pratyekabuddhas And to bodhisattvas.
“ ‘I make a confession of all Disrespect I have shown To teachers of the Dharma and Disrespect I have shown to the Dharma itself.
“ ‘I make a confession of all My rejection of the Dharma And disrespect to my parents Through being in constant ignorance.
“ ‘I make a confession of all Obscuration through stupidity and foolishness; Through desire, anger, and ignorance; And through pride and arrogance.
“ ‘I will make offerings to those with the ten strengths In the worlds in the ten directions.
I will save from all suffering The beings in the ten directions.
“ ‘I will bring all the Countless beings onto the ten bhūmis.
When they have reached the ten bhūmis, May they all become tathāgatas.
“ ‘Until I can free them all From the ocean of suffering, For millions of eons I will be active For the sake of every single being.
“ ‘I will teach those beings This profound teaching That is called The Sublime Golden Light And purifies one of all karma.
“ ‘Those who have committed dreadful evil acts Throughout a thousand eons Will purify themselves of them Through one single confession.
“ ‘Those who are obscured by bad karma Will quickly become purified of it Through confessing with these confessions Through the good Sublime Golden Light.
“ ‘I will dwell upon the ten bhūmis, The supreme ten that are the source of jewels.
I will cause the qualities of a buddha to appear And liberate others from the ocean of existence.
“ ‘Through the inconceivable qualities of a buddha, The flow of the ocean of buddhahood, And the deep ocean of buddha qualities, I will have the perfection of omniscience.
“ ‘Through a hundred thousand samādhis, Through countless powers of mental retention, And through the strengths, powers, and aspects of enlightenment, I will become a sublime one with the ten strengths.
“ ‘I pray that the buddhas look upon me And regard me with their minds.
I pray that with their minds of great compassion They apprehend the errors I have made.
“ ‘I am tormented by a sorrowful mind, By wretchedness, by misery, and by terror Concerning the bad actions I have done In the past, throughout a hundred eons.
“ ‘I am terrified of my bad actions.
My mind is always low.
Whatever I do, I find no happiness.
“ ‘All the compassionate buddhas Dispel the fear of all beings.
I pray that you apprehend my faults And free me from fear.
“ ‘May the tathāgatas remove The stain of my kleśas and karma.
I pray that the buddhas wash me With the water of their compassion.
“ ‘I confess all my bad actions; Those that I have done in the past And those that are my present bad actions, I make a confession of them all.
“ ‘I make the commitment that I will not do again All the wrong actions that I have done.
I will not conceal those bad actions, Those wrong actions that I have done.
“ ‘There are three kinds of physical actions; There are four kinds of verbal actions; There are three kinds of mental actions— I make a confession of them all.
“ ‘Those actions done physically, those done verbally, And those done mentally— The ten kinds of karma I have created— I make a confession of them all.
“ ‘Having forsaken the ten bad actions, I will practice the ten that are good.
I will dwell upon the ten bhūmis And be endowed with the ten supreme strengths.
“ ‘Whatever bad karma I possess Will bring undesirable results.
I make a confession of all of it In the presence of the buddhas.
“ ‘Whatever good actions have been done, Whether in this Jambudvīpa Or in other world realms, I rejoice in them all.
“ ‘Whatever merit I have created Through my body, speech, and mind, Through those meritorious roots I will reach the highest enlightenment.
“ ‘Whatever dreadful bad actions have been made By a foolish mind distressed within existences, I confess each one of those bad actions Before the unequaled one with the ten strengths.
“ ‘I confess whatever bad karma I have accumulated In dangerous lives, in dangerous existences, In dangerous worlds, with a dangerous and unstable mind, Through various kinds of dangerous physical behavior.
“ ‘In the presence of the unequaled jinas, I confess every single bad action I have done Because of perilous, foolish stupidity and kleśas, Because of perilous association with wicked friends, “ ‘Because of perilous saṃsāra and perilous desire, Because of perilous anger and perilous ignorance, Because of perilous fatigue and perilous times, And because of a perilous lack of producing merit.
“ ‘I praise the buddhas, who are like shining golden mountains, Who are like Sumeru, and like oceans of qualities.
I go for refuge to those jinas And bow my head to all those jinas.
“ ‘Golden in color, stainless gold, golden light, With the feature of eyes of pure, stainless beryl— A buddha sun, the source of glorious brilliance and blazing fame Dispelling deep darkness with the light rays of compassion.
“ ‘With perfectly stainless, very beautiful, excellent limbs, The buddha sun’s limbs are as if covered with stainless gold.
The light rays of the muni moon bring pleasure To minds pained by the fires of the kleśas, which are like blazing fires.
“ ‘With faculties and limbs beautified by the thirty-two supreme signs, Limbs beautified by the excellent features, And with a net of light rays producing blazing, glorious, brilliant merit, You are present like the sun in the darkness of the three worlds.
“ ‘Body aspects the color of vast, beautiful, stainless beryl; The red of dawn, silver, crystal, and copper-red; Adorned by a net of light rays of various colors, You, great Muni, are beautiful like the sun. “ ‘The multitude of light rays from the sun of the sugatas dry up The intensely fierce and violent ocean of suffering.
Falling into the river of distress, the great river of saṃsāra, Waters of death and waves of aging churn with misery.
“ ‘I praise the buddhas, who have golden bodies, The source of wisdom, supreme within the three worlds.
Their limbs shine with the color of gold; Their limbs are adorned by beautiful signs.
“ ‘Just as the water of the ocean is immeasurable, Just as the particles in the earth are infinite, Just as there is no end of stones in Meru, And just as there is an endless extent to space, “ ‘The qualities of a buddha are similarly infinite.
There is no one among all beings who can know them.
Even if they examined and contemplated for many eons, They still would not know the end of those qualities.
“ ‘By counting for eons one may know how many measures, Each the size of a drop of water on the tip of a hair, There are in the earth, with its stones, mountains, and oceans.
But one could never perceive a limit to the qualities of a buddha.
“ ‘May all beings become like that, With those qualities, colors, fame, and renown, With bodies adorned by the signs of goodness And beautified by the eighty features.
“ ‘May I, through this good karma, Become before long a buddha in the world.
May I teach the Dharma for the benefit of beings, And may I free beings afflicted by many sufferings.
“ ‘May I be victorious over powerful Māra and his army.
May I turn the good wheel of the Dharma.
May I remain for countless eons, And may I satisfy beings with the water of amṛta.
“ ‘May I bring to completion the supreme six perfections, Just as the jinas of the past have completed them.
May I destroy the kleśas and clear away suffering, And bring desire, anger, and ignorance to an end.
“ ‘May I always remember lifetimes— A hundred lifetimes, ten billion lifetimes.
May I constantly recollect the lords of munis, And may I listen to their vast speech.
“ ‘May I through these good actions Always succeed in meeting with buddhas.
May I completely forsake bad actions And may I practice good actions, the source of merit.
“ ‘May all the bad karma of all beings In every realm come to an end in their worlds.
May those beings with impaired faculties and defective limbs All possess complete faculties on this day.
“ ‘May those in the ten directions who have no protector, And are sick, weak, and feeble in body, All be quickly freed from illness And gain health, strength, and their faculties.
“ ‘May those whose lives are endangered by attacks from kings and robbers And are in distress from hundreds of various kinds of suffering— All those beings in misfortune and who are suffering— Become freed from hundreds of the greatest, most dreadful terrors.
“ ‘Those who are beaten, who are in painful bondage, Who remain in various kinds of distress, Who are disturbed by thousands of tribulations And meet various kinds of dreadful terrors and miseries, “ ‘May they all become free from their bonds.
May those who are beaten be freed from beatings.
May those who are to be killed gain their lives, And may they be free from all distress and fear.
“ ‘May the beings who are pained by hunger and thirst Obtain various kinds of food and drink.
May the blind see the variety of forms.
May the deaf hear pleasant sounds.
“ ‘May the naked find a variety of clothes.
May poor beings discover treasures.
May all beings become happily possessed Of many kinds of wealth, grain, and jewels.
“ ‘May no one be afflicted with the experience of suffering.
May all beings become beautiful, With excellent, attractive, pleasant bodies, And always fully possess many kinds of happiness.
“ ‘May beings, completely endowed with merit, have food and drink As soon as they think of them.
May they have melodious vīnas, mṛdaṅga drums, and paṭaha drums; Springs, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs, “ ‘With golden lotuses, and blue and red lotuses; Food and drink, clothes, wealth, pearls, jewels, and other treasures; And jewelry of gold and various other jewels and beryls— May they have them all as soon as they are thought of.
“ ‘May the word suffering not exist in any world.
May not a single inimical being be seen.
May they all have an illustrious color And may they illuminate each other.
“ ‘May that which is perfect in the human world, And arises in the minds of beings, Be complete as the result of their merit As soon as they have wished for it.
“ ‘May various perfumes, garlands, ointments, Clothes, powders, and flowers Rain down from trees throughout the three times, And may beings obtain them and be made happy.
“ ‘May they make offerings in the ten directions To all the countless tathāgatas, Perfect bodhisattvas, śrāvakas, And the eternal, spotless, stainless Dharma.
“ ‘May they always avoid lower existences, May they transcend the eight unfortunates states, May they attain the king of fortunate states, And may they always reach the presence of the buddhas.
“ ‘May they always be born into a high family.
May they possess a treasure of wealth and grain.
May they be perfectly adorned throughout many eons By fame, renown, and excellent bodies and color.
“ ‘May all women always be males Who are heroic, courageous, and wise.
May they all practice for the sake of enlightenment, And may they practice the six perfections.
“ ‘May they see the buddhas in the ten directions Seated blissfully on thrones of beryl jewels Beneath supreme, precious trees, And may they hear their teaching of the Dharma.
“ ‘The bad karma that I have created In perilous lifetimes I previously obtained, And the undesirable results accrued by bad karma, May all of that vanish without any remainder.
“ ‘Those beings who are in the bondage of existence, Tightly bound by the noose of saṃsāra, May the hands of wisdom untie their bonds, And may they quickly be freed from suffering.
“ ‘I rejoice in the entirety Of the various profound merits Accomplished by beings in this Jambudvīpa And by those who are in other world realms.
“ ‘Through the merit that is created By my rejoicing in body, speech, and mind, May I reach the spotless, highest enlightenment, The result and fulfillment of my prayers.
“ ‘Someone who pays homage and praises With a mind that is always clear, pure, and unstained Will through this recitation of a dedication Avoid the lower realms for sixty eons.
“ ‘The men, women, brahmins, and kṣatriyas Who praise the jinas, with palms together in homage, Through the recitation of these verses Will remember their lifetimes in all their lives.
“ ‘Their limbs will be adorned by all aspects and attributes.
They will be endowed with various merits and qualities.
They will be continually offered to by kings, the lords of men.
That is what they will be like wherever they are.
“ ‘Those into whose ears the sound of this confession has entered Have not accomplished goodness in the presence of only one buddha, Nor in the presence of only two, or four, or five, or ten, But rather have accomplished goodness in the presence of a thousand buddhas.’ ”
This concludes “The Confession,” the fourth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 5: The Source of Lotus Flowers: A Praise of All the Buddhas Then the Bhagavat said to the noble goddess Bodhisattvasamuccayā, “Noble goddess, at that time, in that time, there was a king by the name of Suvarṇa­bhujendra.
Through this praise of all the tathāgatas, The Source of Lotus Flowers, he praised the buddha bhagavats of the past, future, and present.
“ ‘The jinas who have appeared in the past And the jinas present in worlds in the ten directions, I pay homage to those jinas And I praise all those jinas.
“ ‘A lord of munis is peaceful, totally peaceful, and pure.
His body is a perfect golden color.
A buddha’s speech is pleasant with every utterance, A speech that resounds like the voice of Brahmā.
“ ‘He has hair like a bee, a peacock, and a blue lotus, With dark blue curls like the blue jaybird.
His teeth are pure white like snow or a conch, And he is always beautiful like gold.
“ ‘His eyes are long, dark blue, and stainless; They are like blossomed blue lotuses.
His broad, excellent tongue is the color of a red lotus, Glowing like a red lotus, like red-lotus anthers.
“ ‘The ūrṇā hair on his face is the color of a conch or lotus root; It curls to the right and is the color of white beryl.
It is like a sliver of moon, the last of the moon.
The Muni’s body has a navel as vivid as a carpenter bee.
“ ‘He has a prominent nose that is always gleaming And is soft and an excellent color, like bright gold.
He always, continuously, has the perfect nose of all the jinas, Which is soft, sublime, supreme, and noble.
“ ‘From each and every pore there Rises a hair that curls to the right, A dark blue, shining, gleaming curl, Blue and beautiful like a peacock’s neck.
“ ‘As soon as he was born, his body shone, Filling all worlds in the ten directions with light, Ending the endless sufferings in the three worlds, And satisfying beings with every happiness.
“ ‘He satisfied with happiness The beings in the hells, animals, Pretas, devas, and human beings, And brought to an end all lower existences.
“ ‘His light was the excellent color of gold; His body shone like purified gold.
His perfectly stainless face is a sugata moon, His stainless mouth smiling beautifully.
“ ‘His body and limbs are soft like a young boy’s.
He has a perfect, powerful stride like a lion’s.
He has long hands and very long arms Like vines on a sal tree moved by the breeze.
“ ‘He has a fathom-wide aura that radiates light; He is as bright as a thousand suns.
The stainless, supreme body of the lord of munis Illuminates all of the infinite realms.
“ ‘A multitude of night-bringing moons and suns, In endless hundreds of thousands of realms, All become eclipsed by The brilliant light of the Buddha.
“ ‘In endless hundreds of thousands of realms, May beings see the tathāgata suns— The suns of the buddhas, the lamps of worlds— As a hundred thousand buddha suns.
“ ‘His body is endowed with a hundred thousand merits.
His body is adorned by all good qualities.
The Jina’s arms are like the trunk of the king of elephants.
His hands and feet are beautiful with stainless light.
“ ‘The buddhas who have been, who are as numerous as atoms; Who are as numerous as the dust on the surface of the earth; Those who are appearing, who are as numerous as atoms; Those who are present, who are as numerous as atoms— “ ‘To those jinas I pay homage In pure faith, with body and speech, Offering flowers and offering perfumes, And with a hundred praises and a virtuous mind.
“ ‘The good qualities that the jinas have Are a manifold multitude of the very best.
I could not describe those qualities of the jinas In a thousand eons with a hundred tongues.
“ ‘With a thousand tongues I could not describe Even a fraction of the qualities of a single jina, So how could I describe with a thousand tongues The qualities of all the jinas?
“ ‘If the world and its paradises became an ocean, And up to the summit of existence became filled with water, It would be possible to measure it with the tip of a hair.
But one cannot measure a single quality of the sugatas.
“ ‘With faith and with body, speech, and mind I praise and eulogize all the jinas.
Through my accumulated perfect results of merit, May beings reach the state of buddhahood.’
“When the king had praised the Buddha in that way, The king prayed in this way: ‘Wherever I am born, In endless future eons, “ ‘May I see such a drum in a dream.
There, may I hear this kind of confession.
May I encounter in every lifetime A praise such as this Source of Lotuses.
“ ‘May I hear in a dream of those Infinite, unequaled qualities of the buddhas, Which are difficult to acquire even in a thousand eons, And may I teach them when I am awake.
“ ‘May I free beings from the ocean of suffering.
May I complete the six perfections And afterward attain the highest enlightenment, And may my realm be without an equal.
“ ‘Through the ripened result of offering a drum, And through the cause that is praising the buddhas, May I directly see the Śākya lord of munis, And may I attain there the prophecy of my buddhahood.
“ ‘May these two youths, my two sons, Kanaka­bhujendra and Kanaka­prabhāsvara, Attain there the prophecy Of attaining the highest enlightenment.
“ ‘May those beings who have no protector or savior, Who are without a refuge and are in distress, May they all in the future Have saviors, protectors, and refuges.
“ ‘May the source of all suffering come to an end.
May there be the source of all happiness.
May I have the conduct of enlightenment in future eons, Which are as numerous as the eons of the past.
“ ‘Through the confession of The Sublime Golden Light, May my ocean of bad actions dry up, May my ocean of karma come to an end, And may my ocean of kleśas cease to exist.
“ ‘May my ocean of merit become complete.
Through the power of the light of stainless wisdom, May the ocean of my wisdom become complete, And may there be an ocean of all qualities.
“ ‘May the precious qualities of enlightenment be complete.
Through the power of The Sublime Golden Light confession.
May my merit become radiant.
May the light of my enlightenment be purified.
“ ‘Through the sublime light of stainless wisdom, May my body shine with light.
In order that the light of merit be bright, May I become preeminent within the three worlds.
“ ‘May I always have the power of merit.
May I be liberated from the ocean of suffering And practice enlightened conduct in future eons With every happiness that is like an ocean.
“ ‘In future times, may my realm Have the same infinite qualities As the superior, infinite qualities Of all the jinas in the realms That have been in the three worlds in the past.’ ”
This concludes “The Source of Lotus Flowers: A Praise of All the Buddhas,” the fifth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 6: Emptiness Then the Bhagavat recited these verses: “I have taught the Dharmas of emptiness Very extensively in countless other sūtras.
Therefore, in this supreme sūtra I will teach the Dharmas of emptiness briefly.
“Unknowing beings with little intelligence Are not able to know all the Dharmas.
Therefore, in this supreme sūtra I will teach the Dharmas of emptiness briefly.
“I teach this lord of supreme sūtras Through other methods, ways, and causes, And through compassion, so that all beings will understand And so that it will arise in beings.
“This body is like an empty village.
The senses are like six village thieves, Who, although they are in the same village, Are not aware of one another.
“The sense of sight runs toward forms; The sense of hearing moves after sounds; The sense of smell steals various aromas; The sense of taste runs after flavors; “The sense of touch pursues tactility; The mental sense investigates phenomena.
These six senses in relation to one another Are each engaging with their own objects of perception.
“The mind is unstable, like an illusion.
The six senses experience their fields of perception.
The six village thieves present there, Are like a man running around in an empty village.
“Just as the mind and the six present senses Know the range of sensory perception— Forms, sounds, and likewise smells, Flavors, tactility, and the range of mental phenomena— “The mind enters the senses, moving like a bird Throughout all six of them.
In whatever sense it is present, It has the nature of that sense’s perception.
“The body is unmoving and has no activity.
It has no essence and arises from conditions.
It has no real existence but arises from concepts.
It is an empty village; it is like a working machine.
“Earth, fire, water, and air Dwell here and there outside the village.
They are like poisonous snakes in one location That are always in conflict with one another.
“Of those four snakes of the elements, Two move upward and two go downward; They go in twos to the main and intermediate directions, And all those element snakes are destroyed.
“The earth snake and the water snake— These two come to an end below.
The fire snake and the air snake— They go upward into the sky.
“The mind and the consciousnesses remain, And they go according to previous karma.
According to the karma created in the past, they are reborn Into an existence among devas, humans, or the three lower realms.
“When the phlegm, air, and bile come to an end, The body becomes covered with urine and vomit.
It becomes a disgusting mass of worms And is cast into the charnel ground as if it were wood.
“Goddess, look at these phenomena, At whatever being or individual is here; All of these phenomena are empty, But they occur through the factor of ignorance.
“All these great elements are not ‘great occurrences.’
They occur through nonoccurrence and so do not occur.
Because the occurring elements are nonoccurring, For that reason I call them ‘great elements.’
“They are not existent and never were existent.
They come to be because of ignorance.
This ignorance, too, is not existent.
Therefore, I teach that this is ignorance.
“Formations, consciousness, and name and form; The six āyatanas, contact, and sensation; Craving, grasping, and likewise becoming; And the misfortunes of birth, aging and death, and misery— “Those inconceivable sufferings in saṃsāra That are present in the wheel of saṃsāra Have happened without happening and have no origination.
The distinctions made by an erroneous mind, “And the view that there is a self, should be cut through.
Cut through the net of the kleśas with the sword of wisdom.
See that the basis of the skandhas is empty.
Reach the vast qualities of the buddhas.
“I have opened the gate of the city of amṛta.
I have shown everyone the vessel of amṛta liquid.
I have entered the place that is the city of amṛta, And I have been satiated by the amṛta liquid.
“I have beaten the sublime great drum of the Dharma.
I have blown the sublime conch of the Dharma.
I have lit the sublime lamp of the Dharma, And I have sent down a sublime rain of Dharma.
“I have defeated the supreme enemy, the kleśas.
I have raised the sublime banner of the Dharma.
I have brought beings across the ocean of existence.
I have blocked the road to the three lower existences.
“There are beings who are tormented by the fire of the kleśas, Who have no support or protector.
I have extinguished the fire of the kleśas in those beings And brought them relief with the cooling liquid of amṛta.
“For that reason, through many past eons I made offerings to innumerable guides, And in seeking for the Dharma body I practiced resolute discipline for the sake of enlightenment.
“I gave away my arms, eyes, and legs; My head, beloved sons and daughters, Wealth, treasures, ornamentations of jewels and pearls, Gold, beryl, and various kinds of jewels.
“If all the trees in the trichiliocosm, And all the grasses, the plants, And the forests—everything that Grows from the ground—were to be cut down, “And they were all ground down And made into the smallest atoms And were formed into a heap of powder That reached the domain of the sky, “It would not be possible to divide that into portions.
There are the particles that exist in the earth— The countless elemental particles In all the trichiliocosm worlds— “And if the knowledge of all beings Could become that of a single being, Such that with that knowledge All those particles could be counted, “Then the humans with that perfect wisdom, Who would be superior to all other beings, Could possibly count all those particles, But still they would not be able to calculate a jina’s wisdom.
“If they were to engage with a single instant Of the wisdom of the great Muni, For many millions of eons, They would still be unable to calculate it.”
This concludes “Emptiness,” the sixth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 7: The Four Mahārājas Then Mahārāja Vaiśravaṇa, Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Mahārāja Virūḍhaka, and Mahārāja Virūpākṣa rose from their seats, and with their upper robe over one shoulder, knelt on their right knee and, with palms together in homage, bowed toward the Bhagavat and said, “Venerable Bhagavat, this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, is taught by all the tathāgatas; it is viewed by all the tathāgatas; it is thought of by all the tathāgatas; it is possessed by all the assemblies of bodhisattvas; it is paid homage to by all the hosts of devas; it is offered to by all the hosts of devas; it is praised by all the hosts of the lords of devas; it is offered to, praised, and honored by all the protectors of the world; it illuminates all the divine mansions; it brings supreme happiness to all beings; it extinguishes all the suffering in the hells, in the lives of animals, and in the realm of Yama; it brings fears to an end; it repels all the armies of enemies; it brings the calamity of famines to an end; it brings the calamity of disease to an end; it dispels all planetary influences; it brings perfect peace; it ends misery and troubles; and it brings to an end various kinds of calamities—it overcomes a hundred thousand calamities.
“Venerable Bhagavat, if you extensively elucidate this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, through hearing the Dharma, through the liquid of the amṛta of the Dharma, then the divine bodies of we Four Mahārājas and our armies and attendants will increase in their great magnificence; diligence, strength, and power will arise in our bodies; and magnificence, splendor, and good fortune will enter our bodies.
“Venerable Bhagavat, we Four Mahārājas possess the Dharma, teach the Dharma, and are Dharma kings.
“Venerable Bhagavat, through the Dharma we are the kings of devas, nāgas, asuras, garuḍas, gandharvas, kinnaras, and mahoragas.
We repel the terrible hosts of cruel bhūtas who steal the vitality of others.
“Venerable Bhagavat, we Four Mahārājas, and the twenty-eight great generals of the yakṣas and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, are continually looking at all of Jambudvīpa with our pure divine vision, which transcends that of humans, and we defend it and protect it.
“Venerable Bhagavat, for that reason we Four Mahārājas are given the name world protectors.
“Venerable Bhagavat, wherever in this Jambudvīpa a country is defeated by an enemy army—or is stricken by the calamity of famine, or the calamity of disease, or a hundred various calamities, a thousand calamities, or a hundred thousand calamities—then, venerable Bhagavat, we Four Mahārājas will inspire the bhikṣus who possess this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.
“Venerable Bhagavat, when we Four Mahārājas inspire dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣus through miracles and blessings, they will teach this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, in whatever land they are in, and all the various calamities—a hundred calamities, a thousand calamities—that have appeared in that land will cease.
“Venerable Bhagavat, in whatever lands there are dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣus who possess this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light then in those lands The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light will be heard.
“Venerable Bhagavat, when a human king listens to and hears this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, he will guard those bhikṣus who possess this lord of sūtras from all adversaries; he will defend them, keep them in his care, and protect them.
“Venerable Bhagavat, we Four Mahārājas will guard all the beings who dwell in the domain of that human king; we will guard them, defend them, keep them in our care, protect them, and bring them peace and well-being.
“Venerable Bhagavat, if a human king were to make happy, through whatever brings happiness, the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess this lord of sūtras, then, venerable Bhagavat, we Four Mahārājas will, through the requisites for happiness, bring the perfection of happiness and requisites to the beings who dwell in all the dominions of those human kings.
“Venerable Bhagavat, when human kings honor, revere, attend upon, and make offerings to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess this lord of sūtras, then, venerable Bhagavat, we Four Mahārājas will cause all kings to greatly honor, revere, attend upon, and make offerings to those human kings, and they will be praised in all their dominions.”
Then the Bhagavat congratulated the Four Mahārājas, saying, “Excellent, excellent, Mahārājas!
Excellent, excellent, you Mahārājas!
“It is thus: you have served past jinas, have generated roots of merit, have honored many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddhas, have possessed the Dharma, have taught the Dharma, and have been kings of devas and humans through the Dharma.
“It is thus: for a long time, you have had the motivation to benefit all beings; you have had the motivation of happiness and love; you have had the superior motivation of wishing to bring benefit and happiness to all beings; you have prevented that which is not beneficial; and you have been dedicated to accomplishing every happiness for all beings.
“You Four Mahārājas have guarded the kings who have been dedicated to honoring and making offerings to The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, and defended them, kept them in your care, protected them, saved them from attack, and brought them peace and well-being.
“Therefore, you Four Mahārājas, with your army, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, will guard the way of the Dharma of the buddha bhagavats of the past, future, and present.
You will protect it and keep it in your care.
“Therefore, you Four Mahārājas, with your army, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, will be victorious in the battle between the devas and asuras.
You will defeat the asuras.
In this way, The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light subjugates all opposing armies.
For that reason, you should guard the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess this lord of sūtras.
You should defend them, keep them in your care, protect them, and bring them peace and well-being.”
Then Mahārāja Vaiśravaṇa, Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Mahārāja Virūḍhaka, and Mahārāja Virūpākṣa rose from their seats, and with their upper robes over one shoulder, they knelt on their right knee and, with palms together in homage, bowed toward the Bhagavat and said, “Venerable Bhagavat, in the future, when this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light is performed in any village, town, market town, district, kingdom, or royal capital; when it is performed in the domain of any human king; and when, venerable Bhagavat, any human king who acts as a king in accordance with the commitment of the lord of devas and with this treatise on kingship, and always listens to, worships, and makes offerings to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, and honors, venerates, worships, and makes offerings to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess this Lord King of Sūtras, and always listens to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, then at that time, through the liquid amṛta of this Dharma, through the water of the river of listening to the Dharma, the divine bodies of we Four Mahārājas and our army, attendants, and many hundred thousands of yakṣas will increase in their great magnificence, and we will have great diligence, power, and strength.
Our magnificence, splendor, and good fortune will also increase.
“Venerable Bhagavat, we Four Mahārājas, with our army, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, will now and in future times be present in these very bodies in any village, town, market town, district, kingdom, or royal capital where this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light is performed.
“We will guard the human kings who listen to, worship, and make offerings to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
We will defend them, keep them in our care, protect them, save them from attack, and bring them peace and well-being.
“We will guard the royal courts, the kingdoms, and their dominions.
We will defend them, keep them in our care, protect them, save them from attack, and bring them peace and well-being.
We will free those dominions from all fear, harm, and disturbances, and we will repel the armies of enemies.
“If a human king who listens to, worships, and makes offerings to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light has a neighboring enemy king, and if, venerable Bhagavat, that king thinks, ‘I will go with my fourfold army to that domain to destroy it,’ then, venerable Bhagavat, at that time, in that time, through the power of the magnificence of this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, that neighboring enemy king will enter into battle with other kings, who will enter his domain and bring ruin to his domain.
They will bring dreadful ruin to that king.
Bad planetary influences and diseases will also appear in his domain.
There will be hundreds of various kinds of difficulties in his domain.
“Venerable Bhagavat, if a neighboring enemy king goes to that king’s domain, there will be hundreds of various kinds of calamities and hundreds of various kinds of tribulations.
“Venerable Bhagavat, if a neighboring enemy king gathers together his fourfold army and leaves his domain as an invading army and with those four divisions of his army enters another domain in order to destroy a domain where this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, is present, then, venerable Bhagavat, we Four Mahārājas, with our army, attendants, and countless hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, in these very bodies, will go there, and we will drive back the enemy army that is en route.
We will cause them hundreds of various calamities and create obstacles for them.
In that way, the army of the enemy will not even be able to enter that domain, let alone cause its destruction.”
Then the Bhagavat congratulated the Four Mahārājas, saying, “Excellent, excellent, Mahārājas!
Excellent, excellent, you Mahārājas!
You have accomplished this for many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of asaṃkhyeya eons, and for the sake of the highest, most complete enlightenment you should guard, defend, keep in your care, protect, save from attack, and bring peace and well-being to a human king who listens to, worships, and makes offerings to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.
“You should also guard, defend, keep in your care, protect, save from attack, and bring peace and well-being to their royal courts, cities, kingdoms, and dominions.
You should also free those dominions from all fear, harm, and disturbances.
You should repel the armies of enemies.
“You should be eager for there to be no fighting, no quarreling, no contention, and no disputes among the human kings who dwell throughout all of Jambudvīpa.
“In this Jambudvīpa of yours, you Four Mahārājas and your army and attendants, may the eighty-four thousand kings in the eighty-four thousand cities each delight in their own domains.
May they each delight in their own sovereignty.
May they not be harmful to each other’s aggregation of wealth.
May they not attack each other.
May the kings be happy with the sovereignty that they have obtained through their own accumulation of karma in the past.
May they not destroy each other’s dominion.
May they not cause harm to each other in order to destroy each other’s dominion.
“When the eighty-four thousand kings in the eighty-four thousand cities in this Jambudvīpa are loving toward each other; when they have loving and altruistic minds; when they have no fighting, no quarreling, no contention, and no disputes among them and are each happy with their own domains, because of that, you Four Mahārājas, your army and attendants, and this Jambudvīpa will flourish.
It will have good harvests.
It will be delightful.
It will be filled with many people.
It will have fertile earth.
The cycles of periods of time, months, fortnights, and years will be fortuitous.
Both day and night, the planets, the lunar asterisms, the moon, and the sun will move harmoniously.
The rain will fall on the earth at the appropriate times.
The beings who dwell in Jambudvīpa will have all wealth and grain.
They will have numerous possessions, without miserliness.
They will be generous.
They will follow the path of the ten good actions.
Most will be reborn in the higher blissful realms.
The mansions of the devas will be filled with devas and their children.
“Mahārājas, where there is a human king who listens to, worships, and makes offerings to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light; and honors, venerates, worships, and makes offerings to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light; and who, out of kindness to you Four Mahārājas, your army and attendants, and your many hundred thousands of yakṣas, always listens to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, then through the water of the river of listening to the Dharma, the liquid amṛta of this Dharma, your divine bodies will be refreshed, and your divine bodies will increase in their great magnificence, and you will develop diligence, power, and strength.
Your magnificence, splendor, and good fortune will also increase.
“Those human kings will have also made inconceivably vast offerings to me, the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Śākyamuni.
Those human kings will also have made offerings of all inconceivably vast, immense requisites to many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of past, future, and present tathāgatas.
Therefore, a great guardianship will be created for those human kings.
Those human kings will be guarded, defended, cared for, protected, saved from attacks, and endowed with peace and well-being.
There will be a great guardianship created for all their queens, their princes, their harems, and their entire court.
They will be guarded, defended, cared for, protected, saved from attacks, and endowed with peace and well-being.
All the deities who dwell in the royal court will have greater magnificence, greater strength, and inconceivable bliss and happiness.
They will experience various kinds of pleasure.
The cities and the kingdom will also be guarded, defended, unharmed, without enemies, and not oppressed, harmed, or disturbed by enemy armies.”
Then Mahārāja Vaiśravaṇa, Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Mahārāja Virūḍhaka, and Mahārāja Virūpākṣa said to the Bhagavat, “Venerable Bhagavat, the human king who wishes to listen to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, and who wishes to have a great guardianship for himself; who wishes for a great guardianship for all his queens, their princes and princesses, and the harem; who wishes to bring the highest, superior, inconceivable great peace and well-being to his entire court; who wishes to increase his great sovereignty inconceivably in his lifetime; who wishes to possess inconceivable kingship; who wishes to possess an incalculable accumulation of merit; who wishes for his entire domain to be completely guarded; who wishes for it to be protected; who wishes for there to be no harm to his domain; and who wishes for there to be no enemies, no oppression from enemy armies, no disease, and no disturbances—venerable Bhagavat, that human king, with an undistracted mind, with veneration and service, should listen respectfully to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.
“In order to listen to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, that human king should enter a superior royal palace.
Having entered, he should sprinkle perfume and scatter a variety of flower petals in the royal palace.
Where the perfume has been sprinkled, he should set up a high Dharma throne, well adorned with a variety of adornments.
He should adorn that place well with a variety of parasols, banners, and flags.
That human king should wash his body.
He should put on new, perfectly clean clothes and adorn himself with various kinds of jewelry.
He should set out for himself a low seat, and seated on that he should not have the arrogant conceit of a king.
“He should have no attachment to the power of kingship.
With a mind devoid of all arrogance, pride, and conceit, he should listen to this Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light.
He should also perceive the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu as a teacher.
“That human king, at that time, in that time, should regard his principal queen, princes, princesses, and harem in a pleasing and beneficial way.
He should speak to his principal queen, princes, princesses, and harem with pleasant words.
He should have various offerings assembled for listening to the Dharma.
He should be delighted by inconceivable, unequaled joy.
He should be blissful with inconceivable joy and happiness.
He should have delighted senses.
He should think he will attain a great benefit.
He should be delighted with a great delight.
He should welcome the dharmabhāṇaka with great pleasure.”
After they had spoken, the Bhagavat said to the Four Mahārājas, “Mahārājas, at that time, in that time, that human king should wear clothes that are all white, beautiful, and new.
He should adorn himself well with various adornments and jewelry.
He should hold a white parasol.
With great royal power and a great royal display, he should hold various auspicious articles and leave the royal palace to go to welcome the dharmabhāṇaka.
“Why is that?
It is because however many steps the human king takes, that number of hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons in saṃsāra is eliminated, and he will become a cakravartin king that number of hundreds of thousands of quintillions of times.
However many steps he takes, in that lifetime his great sovereignty will increase inconceivably that number of times.
He will attain as his abode for many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons a vast and immense divine aerial palace made of the seven precious materials.
He will obtain hundreds of thousands of divinely human royal families with a vastness that is a divine vastness.
In all his lifetimes, he will have great sovereignty; he will have a long life; he will live for a long time; he will have eloquence; he will be an excellent speaker; he will be famous; he will be widely renowned; he will be worthy of praise; he will benefit the world and its devas and asuras; he will attain the vast, vast happiness of devas and humans; he will have great might; he will possess the power of the strength of a great champion; he will be handsome and attractive; he will possess a perfectly developed, excellent color; in all his lifetimes he will meet a tathāgata; he will obtain a kalyāṇamitra; and he will possess an incalculable aggregation of merit.
“Mahārājas, seeing the benefit of such qualities, the human king should go a yojana to greet the dharmabhāṇaka—he should go a hundred yojanas, a thousand yojanas, to greet him.
He should conceive of that dharmabhāṇaka as the Teacher.
He should think, ‘Today the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Śākyamuni will enter this my royal palace.
Today the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Śākyamuni will take his meal in this my royal palace.
Today I will hear the Dharma of the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Śākyamuni, which is contrary to all worlds.
Today, through hearing the Dharma, I will progress irreversibly toward the highest, most complete enlightenment.
Today I have pleased many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of tathāgatas.
Today I have made an immense, vast, inconceivably great offering to the buddha bhagavats of the past, the future, and the present.
Today I have brought to an end all the suffering in the hells, in rebirth as animals, and in the land of Yama.
Today I have planted the roots of merit that are the seed for attaining many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of the bodies of a king and a lord of the Brahmā devas.
Today I have planted the roots of merit that are the seed for attaining many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of the bodies of a Śakra.
Today I have planted the roots of merit that are the seed for attaining many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of the bodies of a cakravartin king.
Today I have attained liberation from saṃsāra for many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons.
Today I have obtained an immense, vast, unsurpassable, inconceivable aggregation of merit.
Today I have created a great guardianship for all in my harem.
Today I have brought the highest, superior, perfect, inconceivable peace and well-being to this royal palace.
Today I have guarded this entire domain.
It will be defended, unharmed, without enemies, and without the oppression of invading armies, disease, and disturbances.’
“Mahārājas, if the king who with this reverence for the Dharma honors, venerates, worships, and makes offerings to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, and dedicates the best part to you Four Mahārājas, your army, your attendants, the host of devas, and the many hundred thousands of yakṣas, then he will manifest the merit, he will manifest the good karma, and in that life his great sovereignty will increase incalculably.
In that life he will possess the incalculable great magnificence of a king, and he will be adorned by splendor, good fortune, and magnificence.
All his opponents will be eliminated, in accord with the Dharma, together with all his enemies.”
When the Bhagavat had said that, the Four Mahārājas said to him, “Venerable Bhagavat, if there is a human king with such a reverence for the Dharma as that—one who honors, venerates, worships, and makes offerings to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess The Lord King of Sūtras, The Sublime Golden Light, and who, for our sake, purifies and cleans the royal palace, and sprinkles it well with various perfumes—then he will be listening to the Dharma together with us, the Four Mahārājas.
If he gives a little share of his roots of merit to us and all devas, then, venerable Bhagavat, as soon as the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu comes to his seat, that king, for the sake of us, the Four Mahārājas, should spread the aroma of various scents.
“Venerable Bhagavat, as soon as he perfumes with various scents, in order to make an offering to The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, there will appear from the various aromas vines of various perfumes and incenses.
In that instant, that moment, that fraction of a second, in the sky above each of our palaces, the palaces of the Four Mahārājas, there will be present a parasol composed of the vines of various perfumes and incenses, and there will spread a vast aroma.
There will appear a golden light that will illuminate our palaces.
“Venerable Bhagavat, the vines of various perfumes and incenses, in that instant, that moment, that fraction of a second, will appear as parasols composed of vines of various perfumes and incenses present in the sky above the palaces of Brahmā, the lord of Sahā; of Śakra, the lord of the devas; of the great goddess Sarasvatī; of the great goddess Dṛḍhā; of the great yakṣa general Saṃjñeya and the other twenty-eight great yakṣa generals; of the great deity Maheśvara; of the great yakṣa general Vajrapāṇi; of the great yakṣa general Māṇibhadra; of Hārītī with her entourage of five hundred children; of the nāga king Anavatapta; and of the nāga king Sāgara.
A vast aroma will spread and a golden light will appear inside those palaces, and that light will illuminate everything.”
When the Four Mahārājas had said that, the Bhagavat said to them, “Mahārājas, parasols comprised of vines of various perfumes and incenses will be present not only in the sky above the palaces of each of you Four Mahārājas.
Why is that?
As soon as the human king perfumes with those aromas as an offering to The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, there will arise from the censer in his hands vines of perfumes and incense.
In that instant, in that moment, in that fraction of a second, throughout all the world realms in the trichiliocosm, where there are a billion moons, a billion suns, a billion great oceans, a billion Sumeru kings of mountains, a billion Cakravāḍa and Mahācakravāḍa kings of mountains, a billion four-continent world realms, a billion Mahārājakāyikas, a billion Trāyastriṃśas, and so on, up to a billion paradises of the state of neither perception nor nonperception; throughout all those world realms in the billion world realms, there will be parasols composed of those vines of incenses and perfumes in the sky above the palaces of the hosts of devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas.
A vast aroma will spread, and a golden light will appear inside those divine palaces, and that light will illuminate everything.
“Mahārājas, just as parasols composed of vines of incenses and perfumes are present above all the divine palaces in the world realms in these billion world realms, in the same way, as soon as the king makes an offering of perfuming with scent The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, then through the power of the magnificence of this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light there will appear vines of perfume and incense.
In that instant, in that moment, in that fraction of a second, parasols composed of vines of incenses and perfumes will be present in the sky above the many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of tathāgatas, as numerous as the sand grains of the Ganges River, who are in the many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddha realms, as numerous as the sand grains of the Ganges River, that are in the many world realms in the ten directions.
They will perfume many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddhas with an extremely vast variety of perfumes and incenses.
They will shine with a golden light that will illuminate many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddha realms as numerous as the sand grains of the Ganges River.
“Mahārājas, as soon as those miracles occur, many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of tathāgatas, as numerous as the sand grains of the Ganges River will regard that dharmabhāṇaka, and they will congratulate him, saying, ‘Well done, well done, good man!
It is excellent, excellent, that you, good man, wish to teach extensively the way of this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, which has such a profound meaning, which has such a profound illumination, and which possesses inconceivable qualities.
Any being who merely listens to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light will have merit that is not insignificant, not to mention someone who obtains it, possesses it, explains it, reads it, learns it, and teaches it extensively to an assembly.
Why is that?
Good man, it is because on hearing this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of bodhisattvas, as soon as they hear it, become irreversible in their progress toward the highest, most complete enlightenment.’
“Then, at that time, in that time, the many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of tathāgatas in many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddha realms, as numerous as the sand grains of the Ganges River, in the same words, in one voice, as one speech, will say to the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu who is seated on the Dharma throne, ‘Good man, in a future time you will go to the Bodhimaṇḍa.
“ ‘Good man, when you have gone to the supreme, sublime Bodhimaṇḍa, you will sit at the foot of the king of trees, and you will manifest performing with determination many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of disciplines and ascetic practices that are superior to all the three worlds and transcend all beings.
“ ‘Good man, you will perfectly adorn the Bodhimaṇḍa.
“ ‘Good man, you will protect all the world realms of a billion worlds.
“ ‘Good man, at the foot of the king of trees, you will be victorious over the innumerable armies of Māra, who have terrifying forms, terrifying presence, hideous manifestations, and various hideous forms.
“ ‘Good man, having gone to the supreme, sublime Bodhimaṇḍa, you will attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of complete buddhahood that is beyond analogy and is complete peace, spotless, and profound.
“ ‘Good man, you will be seated upon the central, eternal vajra seat.
You will turn the Dharma wheel that is praised by all the jinas, is supremely profound, and has the twelve forms.
“ ‘Good man, you will beat the unsurpassable great drum of the Dharma.
“ ‘Good man, you will blow the unsurpassable conch of the Dharma.
“ ‘Good man, you will raise the great banner of the Dharma.
“ ‘Good man, you will light the unsurpassable lamp of the Dharma.
“ ‘Good man, you will send down the unsurpassable rain of the Dharma.
“ ‘Good man, you will be victorious over many thousands of kleśa enemies.
“ ‘Good man, you will free many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of beings from the terrifying ocean of great terrors.
“ ‘Good man, you will free many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of beings from the wheel of saṃsāra.
“ ‘Good man, you will please many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddhas.’ ”
When the Bhagavat had said that, the Four Mahārājas said to him, “Venerable Bhagavat, when we see a human king who has developed roots of merit with a hundred thousand buddhas, who possesses an incalculable aggregation of merit, and who sees these qualities that arise in this life and the future from this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, then, venerable Bhagavat, out of kindness for him, when we, the Four Mahārājas, and our army, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, are invoked by the vines of various perfumes and incenses at each of our dwellings, we will immediately, in order to listen to the Dharma, make our bodies invisible and will go to the king’s palace, which has been well swept, excellently sprinkled with various perfumes, and excellently adorned with various decorations.
Brahmā, the lord of Sahā; Śakra, the lord of the devas; the great goddess Sarasvatī; the great goddess Śrī; the great goddess Dṛḍhā; the great yakṣa general Saṃjñeya; the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals; the deity Maheśvara; the great yakṣa general Vajrapāṇi; the great yakṣa general Māṇibhadra; Hārītī with her entourage of five hundred children; the nāga king Anavatapta; the nāga king Sāgara; and many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of devas, with their bodies invisible, will come to the human king’s palace, which has been adorned with various decorations.
In order to listen to the Dharma, they will come to the dharmabhāṇaka’s high Dharma throne, which has been perfectly adorned with various adornments and set up on a floor that has been scattered with flowers.
“Venerable Bhagavat, we, the Four Mahārājas, and our army, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, all in unison, as soon as we have been satiated by the liquid amṛta of the Dharma, will become guardians of that human king, the human king who is aided by a kalyāṇamitra, who has accomplished goodness, and who makes the vast gift of the unsurpassable Dharma.
We will defend him, keep him in our care, protect him, and bring him peace and well-being.
We will guard, defend, keep in our care, protect, and bring peace and well-being to that royal palace, that city, and that domain.
We will save them from attack.
We will free those in that domain from all fear, harm, disease, and disturbances.
“Venerable Bhagavat, when someone is a human king and in that human king’s domain there appears The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, then, venerable Bhagavat, if that human king does not honor, venerate, worship, and make offerings to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, and we, the Four Mahārājas, and our army, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, are not satiated by hearing this Dharma and by the liquid amṛta of the Dharma, and are not worshiped, then the brilliance of our bodies will not increase.
Our diligence, power, and might will not develop, and magnificence, splendor, and good fortune will not increase within our bodies.
“Venerable Bhagavat, we, the Four Mahārājas, and our army, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, will abandon that domain.
“Venerable Bhagavat, if we abandon that domain, all the devas who dwell in that domain will also abandon it.
“Venerable Bhagavat, if the devas abandon that domain, there will various kinds of troubles in that domain.
There will be terrible troubles for the king.
All the beings who dwell in that domain will become belligerent, quarrelsome, contentious, and disputatious.
Various malign planetary influences and illnesses will occur.
Shooting stars will fall from every direction.
The planets and lunar asterisms will be in disharmony.
The moon will pass through the sky as if it is the sun.
Though the moon and sun will be in the sky, eclipses will continually obscure them.
From time to time there will be swirling rainbow colors in the sky.
The ground will shake.
Cavities in the ground will emit sounds.
A fierce wind will arise in the domain.
A fierce rain will fall.
There will be the calamity of famine.
The country will be defeated by an enemy army and ruined.
The beings there will suffer many troubles.
That domain will experience unhappiness.
“Venerable Bhagavat, if we, the Four Mahārājas, and our army, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, along with that domain’s devas and nāgas, abandon that domain, there will be hundreds of such calamities, thousands of such various calamities.
“Venerable Bhagavat, if there is a human king who wishes to be well guarded; who wishes to experience the various joys of a king for a long time; who wishes to enjoy for a long time the pleasures of being a king; who wishes to make all the beings who dwell in his domain happy; who wishes to defeat all the armies of his adversaries; who wishes to protect his entire domain for a long time; who wishes to be a Dharma king; and who wishes to free his domain from all fear, harm, disease, and disturbances, then, venerable Bhagavat, that human king should listen with conviction to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
He should honor, venerate, worship, and make offerings to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
We, the Four Mahārājas, and our army and attendants should become satisfied by this accumulation of the roots of merit through listening to the Dharma and by this liquid amṛta of the Dharma.
The great brilliance of these divine bodies of ours should be increased.
“Why is that?
Venerable Bhagavat, the human king should listen with conviction to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
“Venerable Bhagavat, this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light is much greater than, far superior to, all the various worldly and nonworldly treatises taught by the lord of Brahmās; all the various treatises taught by Śakra, the lord of the devas; and all the various worldly and nonworldly treatises taught for the benefit of beings by ṛṣis who possessed the five higher cognitions.
“Venerable Bhagavat, a tathāgata is much greater than, far superior to, a hundred thousand lords of the Brahmās, the many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of Śakras, and all the hundreds of thousands of quintillions of ṛṣis endowed with the five higher cognitions, and he teaches extensively this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light in order to benefit beings.
“The bhagavat arhat samyaksaṃbuddha has the blessing of the power of great compassion, which is far superior to that of a hundred thousand quintillion lords of the Brahmās; he has a tathāgata’s unsurpassable wisdom, which is far superior to the divine knowledge of a hundred thousand quintillion Śakras; and he has a blessing that is far superior to that of all the many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of ṛṣis who have the various forms of the five higher cognitions.
The bhagavat arhat samyaksaṃbuddha teaches this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light extensively in this Jambudvīpa for the sake of all beings so that the kings of humans who dwell throughout Jambudvīpa will have sovereignty; so that all beings will become happy; so that all domains will be guarded and defended; so that there will be no harm or enemies in all dominions; so that the armies of adversaries will be defeated and will retreat; so that there will be no disease or disturbances; so that human kings will light the great lamp of the Dharma and illuminate their own domains; so that the mansions of the devas will be filled with devas and their children; so that we, the Four Mahārājas, and our armies, attendants, and many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas, and all the hosts of devas that dwell in Jambudvīpa, will be satiated and worshiped; so that our divine bodies will increase in great magnificence; so that diligence, might, and great strength develop in our bodies; so that there will be good harvests; so that there will be happiness throughout all Jambudvīpa, which will become filled with beings and people; so that all beings who dwell in Jambudvīpa will be happy, experiencing various kinds of happiness; so that all beings will experience the vast, vast happiness of devas and humans for many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons; and so that they will be in the company of buddha bhagavats and in a future time will all attain the highest, most complete enlightenment.
“Whatever worldly or nonworldly kingly duties, treatises on kingship, or kingly deeds throughout Jambudvīpa bring happiness to all beings, they are all taught, described, and explained by the bhagavat arhat tathāgata samyaksaṃbuddha in thisLord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
“Venerable Bhagavat, because of that cause and condition, a human king should reverently listen with conviction to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, reverently worship it, and reverently make offerings to it.”
When the Four Mahārājas had said that, the Bhagavat said to them, “Therefore, you Four Mahārājas, with your army and attendants, should with great enthusiasm guard the kings who with conviction listen to, worship, and make offerings to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
“Mahārājas, you should cause the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess this lord king of sūtras to possess buddha activity.
They will perform buddha activity in this world with its devas, humans, and asuras.
They will extensively and correctly teach this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
“You, the Four Mahārājas, should ensure that the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess this lord of sūtras are guarded, are unharmed, have no illness, have no disturbances, and are happy.
“Guard, defend, take in your care, protect, and bring peace and well-being to the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who will teach this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Then Mahārāja Vaiśravaṇa, Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Mahārāja Virūḍhaka, and Mahārāja Virūpākṣa rose from their seats, and with their upper robes over one shoulder, knelt on their right knee, and with palms together in homage, bowed toward the Bhagavat.
At that time, they directly praised the Bhagavat with these appropriate verses: “To the stainless moon of the Jina’s body, To the light of the thousand rays of the Jina’s sun, To the stainless lotuses of the Jina’s eyes, And to the spotless lotus roots of the Jina’s teeth; “To the sea of the Jina’s qualities That is the source of many jewels; To the Jina’s ocean filled with the water of wisdom That is pervaded by hundreds of thousands of samādhis; “To the Jina’s feet with the design of wheels, With hubs, rims, and a thousand spokes; To the hands and feet beautified by webs, The webs of the feet like those of the lord of geese; “And to the mountain of the Jina that is stainless gold And that is shining like a golden mountain, Who, like Meru, possesses all qualities— To the Jina, the lord of mountains, we pay homage.
“To the Tathāgata who is like the sun and moon, To the one who is similar to and equal to space, Who has no impediment like a mirage or illusion, To the stainless Jina we pay homage.”
The Bhagavat then spoke these verses to the Four Mahārājas: “You who are guardians of the world Should protect with unwavering diligence The Golden Light, the Supreme King andLord of Sūtras of those with the ten strengths, “So that this profound, precious sūtra That bestows happiness on all beings Will remain long in this Jambudvīpa For the sake of the happiness and benefit of beings.
“It will bring an end to all the suffering Of the beings that are in the hells And the suffering of the lower existences In the worlds of this trichiliocosm.
“Within this Jambudvīpa, May all the kings in Jambudvīpa With great, perfect joy Protect their domains through the Dharma.
“May those who make Jambudvīpa happy With excellent harvests and joy Make all beings become happy Throughout the whole of Jambudvīpa.
“Those who are lords of humans here, Who delight in their domain and who are happy and joyful, Who delight in the wealth of sovereignty, Should listen to this lord of the sūtras.
“The opposing hordes of enemies will come to an end; This source of goodness will repel enemy armies.
Ruination through the greatest fear will be averted.
This lord of sūtras is the source of goodness.
“A king who wishes for good qualities Should view this supreme lord of sūtras As being like a beautiful, precious tree That is in the home, and the source of all qualities.
“Just as cool water dispels thirst When found by someone fatigued by heat, That is what this supreme king of sūtras is like For a king who is thirsty for good qualities.
“Like a precious casket in the hands, Which is a source of every jewel, That is what this supreme king of sūtras, The Golden Light, is for the multitudes of kings.
“The devas make offerings to this lord of sūtras.
The lords of the devas pay homage to it.
The four protectors of the world, With great miracles, guard it well.
“The buddhas in the ten directions Always think of this lord of sūtras.
Whenever this sūtra is taught, The buddhas express their approval.
“The million million yakṣas that guard The domains in the ten directions Listen to this lord of sūtras With joyful minds and with delight.
“The hosts of devas that dwell In Jambudvīpa are beyond number.
Those hosts of devas, with complete joy, Listen to this lord of sūtras.
“Through the act of listening to this sūtra, They gain magnificence, strength, and diligence, And the magnificence of their divine bodies Vastly increases and expands.”
The Four Maharajas, on hearing these verses from the Bhagavat, were astonished, amazed, and overjoyed.
Through the power of the Dharma, they briefly wept and shed tears.
Their bodies shook and their limbs trembled, and they felt joy, bliss, and happiness. They scattered divine coral tree flowers toward the Bhagavat.
When they had scattered them, they rose from their seats, and with their upper robes over one shoulder, knelt on their right knee, and with palms together in homage, bowed toward the Bhagavat and said, “Venerable Bhagavat, we, the Four Mahārājas, each with five hundred yakṣas, will always follow behind the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu in order to guard and protect that dharmabhāṇaka.”
This concludes “The Four Mahārājas,” the seventh chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 8: Sarasvatī Then the great goddess Sarasvatī, with her robe over one shoulder, kneeling with her right knee on the ground and her palms together in homage, bowed toward the Bhagavat and said to the Bhagavat, “Venerable Bhagavat, I, the great goddess Sarasvatī, will bring eloquence to the words of those dharmabhāṇakas so that their words will be beautified.
I will also bestow on them the power of mental retention.
I will establish them in giving definitions.
I will illuminate those dharmabhāṇakas with the great light of wisdom.
If any line of verse or syllables of this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light is left out or forgotten, I will bring all definitions, lines of verse, and syllables to those dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣus.
“So that this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light may remain for a long time in Jambudvīpa and not quickly vanish; so that beings can accomplish roots of merit with a hundred thousand buddha bhagavats; so that many beings on hearing this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, may develop inconceivably sharp wisdom; so that they may gain an inconceivable aggregation of wisdom; so that they may attain good fortune in this life; so that they may have benefit in life and possess an immeasurable aggregation of merit; so that they may seek a variety of methods; so that they may become learned in all treatises; and so that they may attain perfection in a variety of arts, I will bestow the power of retention so that they will not forget.
“I will teach the rite of cleansing with mantras and medicines for the benefit of the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣus and the beings who listen to the Dharma, so that harm from the planets, lunar asterisms, birth, and death; all the harms from fighting, pollution, riots, chaos, nightmares, and misleaders; and the harms from all evil spirits and vetālas will cease.
“These are the herbs and medicines through which the wise can cleanse themselves: “Sweet flag, cow bezoar, and fenugreek, Canafistula, acacia, and shami, Orris root and musk, Crepe ginger, cinnamon, and agarwood; “Chir pine rosin and dammar gum, Bdellium and frankincense, Valerian and black stone flower, Sandalwood and realgar; “Bezoar and costus root, Saffron, nut grass, and mustard seed, Linseed, cardamom, and spikenard, And ironwood flowers and vetiver: “Combine equal amounts of each During the Puṣya lunar house.
Recite these mantra words A hundred times over the powder: tadyathā | sukṛte kṛtaka­malanīlajina­karate haṃkarāte indrajali śakaddre vaśaddre avarta­kasike nakutra kukavilakavimalamati śīlamati sandhi­dhudhuma­mavati śiśiri satyasthite svāhā | “Make a circle of cow dung And scatter flower petals.
Pour sweetened water Into a gold bowl and a silver bowl.
“You should also place there Four men dressed in armor, And place there four maidens Who are adorned and holding pots.
“Perfume the air with bdellium And play the five kinds of musical instruments.
Adorn the goddess with Banners, parasols, and flags.
“In between, place mirrors And arrange arrows and spears.
Then, after closing the boundary, Commence on what is to be done.
syād yathedaṃ arake nayane hile mile gile khikhile svāhā | “Engage in the peaceful activity of cleansing by reciting this mantra while washing the body of the Bhagavat: tadyathā | sugaṭe vigaṭe vigatāvati svāhā | “May the lunar asterisms, wherever they are In the four directions, protect lives.
May they bring to an end the dreadful terrors Of the harms from the stars of one’s birth, The fears that arise from a multitude of actions, And the disturbances of the elements.
tadyathā | śame viṣame svāhā | sagaṭe vigaṭe svāhā | sukhatinate svāhā | sāgara­saṃbhūtāya svāhā | skandhamatāya svāhā | nīlakaṇṭhāya svāhā | aparājita­vīryāya svāhā | himavat­saṃbhūtāya svāhā | animilavaktrāya svāhā | namo bhagavate brāhmaṇe | namaḥ sarasvatyai devyai | sidhyantu mantrapadā daṃ brahma anumanyatu svāhā | “I will be there, because of this washing ritual, in order to guard the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu and those who listen to the Dharma and those who write it out.
“Together with a host of devas, I will end all illness in those villages, towns, marketplaces, and monasteries.
“I will end harm from planetary afflictions, fighting, and pollution; harm from the stars of one’s birth; and all harm from nightmares, troublesome demons, and all evil spirits and vetālas for the bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who possess this lord of sūtras, so that their lifespan will be benefited and they will abandon saṃsāra, will progress irreversibly to the highest, most complete enlightenment, and will quickly attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood.”
Then the Bhagavat congratulated the great goddess Sarasvatī, saying, “Well done, well done, great goddess Sarasvatī!
You act to bring benefit to many beings and happiness to many beings.
It is excellent, excellent, that you have given this teaching of mantras and medicines.”
The great goddess Sarasvatī bowed down to the Bhagavat’s feet and sat to one side.
Then the Kauṇḍinya brahmin, the Dharma master Vyākaraṇa, called upon the goddess Sarasvatī: “Great goddess Sarasvatī, You are worthy of offering, a great ascetic; You are renowned in all worlds; You give the best and have great qualities; “You have the highest attainment, are beautiful, And have put on a darbha grass robe— You are wearing darbha grass clothing, And you stand on one leg.
“All the devas have gathered, And they all speak in one voice: ‘Loosen your tongue and speak The words that will benefit beings.’
syād yathedaṃ | mure cire | avaje avajavate | higule migule | pigalavati maguśe marici samati daśamati agrimagri tara citara capati cicirī śirimiri marici praṇaye lokajyeṣṭhe lokapriye siddhiprite vimamukhiśucikharī apratihate apratehata buddhe namuci namuci mahādevī pratigṛhnanamaskaraṃ| “May I have unimpeded understanding.
May I accomplish the knowledge of treatises, verses, tantras, piṭakas, poetry, and so on.
tadyathā | mahāprabhavā hili hili mili mili | “May I be victorious through the power of the Bhagavatī, the goddess Sarasvatī.
karaṭe keyūre keyūravati hili mili hili mili hili hili | “I summon the great goddess through the truth of the Buddha, the truth of the Dharma, the truth of the Saṅgha, the truth of Indra, and the truth of Varuṇa.
I invoke the great goddess through the truth and true words of all who speak truth in the world.
tadyathā | hili hili hili mili, hili mili | May I be victorious!
I pay homage to the Bhagavatī, the great goddess Sarasvatī!
May I accomplish the mantra words!
svāhā | Then the Kauṇḍinya brahmin, the Dharma master Vyākaraṇa, praised the goddess Sarasvatī with these verses: “All hosts of spirits, listen to me!
I praise the perfectly beautiful face of the sublime goddess, The sublime female, the highest of perfect goddesses In the world with its devas, gandharvas, and lords of devas. “The one named Sarasvatī is endowed with vast eyes.
Her limbs are adorned by an accumulation of various qualities.
She shines with merit, a vastness of stainless wisdom and qualities.
She is like a vision of an accumulation of different jewels.
“I praise her, who has the exceptional qualities of supreme speech.
She produces the supreme, sublime accomplishments.
She produces true praises and good qualities.
She is stainlessly supreme, a shining lotus.
“She has supreme eyes, sublime eyes.
She is the basis for goodness, a vision of goodness.
She is adorned with inconceivable qualities.
She is like the moon shining with pure light.
“She is the source of wisdom and has sublime memory.
She is a supreme lion, the divine steed of humans.
She is adorned by eight arms And she shines like the full moon.
“She has a beautiful voice and lovely speech.
She is endowed with profound wisdom.
She is a sublime being who provides the highest needs.
Her abode is praised by all the hosts of deva and asura lords, And she is continually offered to by the hosts of spirits: svāhā.
“I pay homage to this goddess.
May she bestow special qualities on me.
May she grant me the accomplishment of all that is needed.
May she constantly protect me in the midst of enemies.
“In the morning on arising, recite purely These complete syllables, the full words, And all wishes, wealth, and grain will be attained, And vast accomplishment and goodness will also be obtained.”
This concludes “Sarasvatī,” the eighth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 9: The Great Goddess Śrī Then the great goddess Śrī said to the Bhagavat, “Venerable Bhagavat, I, the great goddess Śrī, will also, in whatever way, bring a perfection of requisites to those dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣus so that they will gain freedom from deprivation; will have a resolute mind; will day and night have happiness of mind; will learn, understand, and correctly recite all the different words and letters in this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, so that, for the sake of those beings who have planted good roots with hundreds of thousands of buddhas, this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light will remain for a long time in Jambudvīpa and will not disappear, and so that beings will hear this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light and will experience the happiness of devas and humans for many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons, and so that there will be no famine and instead excellent harvests.
Beings will become happy through being endowed with every kind of happiness.
They will be in the company of tathāgatas, and in a future time will attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood.
This will end all the suffering in the hells, in the lives of animals, and in the world of Yama.
Robes, food, bedding, medicine while ill, requisites, and other necessities will be brought to those dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣus.
“I, the great goddess Śrī, developed good roots with the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāñcana­prabhāsa­śrī.
In the present, wherever I direct my mind, wherever I look, wherever I go, many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of beings become happy; they become endowed with every kind of happiness.
They do not lack food, drink, wealth, grain, cowries, gold, jewels, pearls, beryl, conchs, crystals, coral, silver, unwrought gold, or other requisites.
Those beings are endowed with all requisites.
Through the power of the great goddess Śrī, they make offerings to that tathāgata.
They make offerings of perfumes, flowers, and incense.
They recite the name ‘the great goddess Śrī’ three times and offer him perfume, incense, and flowers.
They also offer him a variety of flavors, and then their great accumulations of grain increase.
It is said concerning this: “The fertility of the earth increases in the earth.
The devas will be constantly, perfectly happy.
The deities of fruits, harvests, plants, and trees Cause a great variety of harvests to arise.
“I, the great goddess Śrī, will direct my mind toward those beings who say the name of The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light and I will create a great splendor for them.
“The great goddess Śrī dwells in a palace called Suvarṇadhvaja that is made of the seven precious materials in the sublime park called Puṇya­kusuma­prabha in the environs of the palace of Alakāvati.
Any person who wishes to increase their accumulation of grain should clean their house well, wash well, wear clean white clothes, wear clothes that have been perfumed, bow down to the tathāgata arhat samyaksaṃbuddha Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāñcana­prabhāsa­śrī, and say his name three times.
Then the great goddess Śrī will make an offering with her own hands.
Flowers, incense, and perfume should also be offered.
Various kinds of flavors should also be offered.
The name of The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light should be recited three times and words of truth recited.
Also, offerings should be made to the great goddess Śrī.
When flowers and incense are offered, and various kinds of flavors are offered, at that time, through the power of this lord king of sūtras, the great goddess Śrī will turn her mind toward that house and its great accumulation of grain will increase.
“Those who wish to invoke the great goddess Śrī should remember these mantras: “ ‘I pay homage to all the buddhas of the past, the future, and the present.
“ ‘I pay homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
“ ‘I pay homage to the bodhisattvas such as Maitreya.
“ ‘Having paid homage to them, I will practice this mantra.
“ ‘This vidyāmantra will bring me wealth: syād yathedam pratipūrṇavare samanta­vedanagate mahākāryapratiprāpaṇe sattvārtha­samatānuprapūre ayānadharmatā mahābhogine mahāmaitre upasaṃhihe saṃgṛhīte samarthānupālane | “These are words with an infallible meaning.
That single-sentence mantra has the nature of an empowerment bestowed upon the crown of the head and bestows the valid accomplishment of the true nature.
“The practice for beings of middling capacity is to possess and recite this while keeping the eight vows for seven years without transgressions but only roots of merit.
In order for themselves and others to perfect omniscient wisdom, morning and afternoon make offerings of flowers and incense to all buddhas, and pray, ‘May I fulfill this wish of mine, may I fulfill it quickly.’
“In a temple or in a solitary place, clean the building and make a circle of dung.
Offer perfume and incense.
Arrange a clean seat, scatter flower petals on the ground, and then sit on it.
“Then, in that instant, the great goddess Śrī will come and reside there.
From then on, that house, village, town, market town, temple, or place of solitude will never be disturbed and never be in need.
Everyone will obtain cowries, gold, jewels, wealth, grain, and all utensils; they will become happy through all that brings happiness.
“Whatever good actions have been done, give the supreme part to the great goddess Śrī, and because of that she will remain with you for as long as you live and will never abandon you.
All your aspirations will be completely fulfilled.”
This concludes “The Great Goddess Śrī,” the ninth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 10: Dṛḍhā, the Goddess of the Earth “I pay homage to the Bhagavat Tathāgata Ratnaśikhin.
“I pay homage to the Bhagavat Tathāgata Vimalajvala­ratna­suvarṇa­raśmi­prabhā­śikhin “I pay homage to the Tathāgata Jambu Golden Victory Banner Golden Appearance.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Suvarṇa­prabhagarbha.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Radiance of a Hundred Suns’ Illuminating Essence.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Suvarṇa­ratnākaracchatra­kūṭa.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Suvarṇa­puṣpa­jvalaraśmi­ketu.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Mahāpradīpa.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Ratnaketu. “I pay homage to the bodhisattva Ruciraketu.
“I pay homage to the bodhisattva Suvarṇa­prabhāsottama.
“I pay homage to the bodhisattva Golden Essence.
“I pay homage to the bodhisattva Sadāprarudita.
“I pay homage to the bodhisattva Dharmodgata.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Akṣobhya in the east.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Ratnaketu in the south.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Amitāyus in the west.
“I pay homage to the Tathāgata Dundubhisvara in the north.
“Whoever possesses, reads, or learns these names of the tathāgatas and the names of the bodhisattvas from this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light will remember their past lives.”
Then Dṛḍhā, the goddess of the earth, said to the Bhagavat, “Venerable Bhagavat, wherever this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light is taught, in the present or in future times, whether in a village, town, market town, region, wilderness, mountain cave, or royal residence—wherever, Bhagavat, this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light is taught at length—I, Dṛḍhā, the goddess of the earth, will come to that place.
“Wherever a Dharma throne is arranged for the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu, and wherever the dharmabhāṇaka, upon that throne, extensively teaches this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, venerable Bhagavat, I, Dṛḍhā, the goddess of the earth, will come to that place.
With my body invisible, I will go beneath that Dharma throne, and with my highest limb, my head, I will support that dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu under the soles of his feet.
“I also will listen to the Dharma and be satiated by this distilled nectar of the Dharma.
I will honor him; I will make offerings to him.
Having been satiated, having honored him, and being delighted, I will increase the fertility of this sixty-eight-thousand-yojana-wide aggregation of the earth down to its vajra foundation.
I will honor it and perfect it.
On its surface I will saturate it, this disk of the earth, as far as the ocean, with the oil of the earth’s fertility.
I will cause this great earth to be resplendent.
Then, in this Jambudvīpa, the grass, bushes, herbs, and forests will grow with perfect resplendence.
All parks, forests, trees, leaves, flowers, fruits, and harvests of various kinds will be resplendent, aromatic, lustrous, delicious, beautiful, and huge.
“When beings consume them as various kinds of drink and food, their lifespan, strength, complexion, and faculties will increase.
Being endowed with such majesty, strength, complexion, and form, they will accomplish many hundreds of thousands of the various different things necessary on this earth.
They will be dedicated to that and make an effort in that.
They will accomplish actions that create strength.
“Venerable Bhagavat, this will cause all of Jambudvīpa to have peace, good harvests, increase, and joy.
It will become filled with human beings.
All beings in Jambudvīpa will become happy and experience various kinds of joy.
Those beings will possess majesty, strength, and excellent color and form.
“For the sake of this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās should approach the Dharma seat of those who possess this lord king of the sūtras.
Having approached it with a perfectly trusting mind, for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of all beings, they should supplicate the dharmabhāṇaka so that this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light will be taught extensively.
“Why should they do that?
Venerable Bhagavat, if this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light is taught, I, the earth goddess Dṛḍhā, with my servants, will have supreme resplendence and supreme strength.
Our bodies will develop strength, diligence, and great power.
Our bodies will gain magnificence, glory, and splendor.
Venerable Bhagavat, I, the earth goddess Dṛḍhā, will be satiated by this distilled nectar of the Dharma.
I will attain great magnificence, strength, diligence, power, and speed.
The great fertility of earth will increase in this Jambudvīpa’s seven thousand yojanas.
The great earth will become magnificent.
“Venerable Bhagavat, the beings who dwell upon the earth will increase, expand, and become vast.
They will also become widespread, and just as the beings who are upon the earth will become widespread, they will also experience a variety of enjoyments.
They will experience happiness.
They will all enjoy various kinds of food and drink, remain in various kinds of happiness with the entire variety of pleasurable requisites that are present upon the earth, appear from the earth, and are dependent upon the earth, such as clothes, beds, seats, dwellings, houses, divine palaces, parks, rivers, pools, springs, ponds, lakes, and reservoirs.
“Venerable Bhagavat, because of this, all those beings will be repaying my kindness.
There is no doubt that this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light should be respected, listened to, honored, venerated, revered, and offered to.
“Venerable Bhagavat, when those beings leave their individual families and individual homes in order to go to the dharmabhāṇaka; and having gone there have listened to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light; and having heard it returned to their own individual families, homes, villages, and market towns, they will say to those who live in their own home, ‘We have heard a profound Dharma today.
We have obtained an inconceivable accumulation of merit today.
By listening to that Dharma, we have pleased many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of tathāgatas.
By listening to that Dharma today, we have been completely freed from rebirth in the hells, as animals, in the world of Yama, and in the realm of the pretas.
By listening to this Dharma today, we have obtained rebirth in the future as devas and humans for many hundreds of thousands of lifetimes.’
“When they are in their own homes, if they tell even one example from this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light to those other beings, or just one chapter from this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light or one history, or even the name of one bodhisattva or the name of one tathāgata, or just one four-line verse or even a single line of verse, and those other beings hear it—or even if they teach others only the name of this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light—then, venerable Bhagavat, wherever those different beings in different places speak about, or listen to, or talk to one another about these various kinds of causes from the sūtra, then, venerable Bhagavat, all those places will become very resplendent.
They will become very lustrous.
In those various places, for all those beings, the various fertilities of the earth and all requisites will increase, augment, and expand, and all those beings will be happy.
They will have great wealth and great enjoyments.
They will aspire to generosity, and they will have true faith in the Three Jewels.”
When she had spoken, the Bhagavat said to Dṛḍhā, the goddess of the earth, “Goddess of the earth, if any being listens to even one line from this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light then when they pass away from this human world, they will be reborn as a deva in the Trāyastriṃśa paradise or among another class of devas.
“Goddess of the earth, anyone who, in order to make offerings to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, beautifully adorns those places, even with just one parasol or one flag or by draping one cloth, then, goddess of the earth, they will dwell in those constantly adorned places, divine aerial palaces made of the seven jewels in the seven paradises of the desire realm that are perfectly adorned by all adornments.
When those beings pass away from this human realm, they will be reborn in those aerial palaces made of the seven jewels, and at that time, goddess of the earth, they will be reborn seven times in each of those aerial palaces made of the seven jewels.
They will experience the inconceivable bliss of the devas.”
When the Bhagavat had spoken, the earth goddess Dṛḍhā said to the Bhagavat, “Therefore, venerable Bhagavat, I, the earth goddess Dṛḍhā, will be present in the ground below the Dharma seat that is the Dharma seat upon which the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu is seated.
For the sake of those beings who have planted good roots with hundreds of thousands of buddhas, I will make my body invisible and will support that dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu’s feet with my highest limb, my head, so that this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light will remain for a long time in Jambudvīpa and will not disappear soon; so that beings will hear this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light and will experience the happiness of devas and humans for many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons; and so that they will be in the company of tathāgatas and will in a future time attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood and become completely free of the suffering of the hells, the lives of animals, and the world of Yama.”
This concludes “Dṛḍhā, the Goddess of the Earth,” the tenth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 11: Saṃjñeya Then the great yakṣa general Saṃjñeya, accompanied by twenty-eight yakṣa generals, rose from his seat and, with his robe over one shoulder, kneeling with his right knee on the ground and with palms together, bowed toward the Bhagavat and said to the Bhagavat, “Venerable Bhagavat, wherever this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light appears, in the present or in future times, whether in a village, town, market town, region, wilderness, mountain cave, or royal residence, Bhagavat, I, the great yakṣa general Saṃjñeya, accompanied by twenty-eight yakṣa generals, will come to that village, town, market town, region, wilderness, mountain cave, or royal residence.
“I will make my body invisible and will guard that dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu.
I will defend him, take care of him, protect him, save him from punishment, and bring him peace and well-being.
“All men, women, boys, or girls who listen to the Dharma, whoever hears and retains even one four-line verse from this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light or even one line, or even the name of one bodhisattva from this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, or the name of one tathāgata, or even just hears and retains the name of this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, I will defend them all, take care of them, protect them, save them from punishment, and bring them peace and well-being.
I will defend, take care of, protect, save from punishment, and bring peace and well-being to all those families, those homes, those villages, those towns, those market towns, those wildernesses, and those royal residences.
“Venerable Bhagavat, why am I named the great yakṣa general Saṃjñeya?
Venerable Bhagavat, it is because I know all Dharmas, I understand all Dharmas, I comprehend all Dharmas.
Whatever the number of Dharmas, the nature of the Dharmas, or the classes of Dharmas, venerable Bhagavat, I have direct knowledge of all Dharmas.
“Venerable Bhagavat, in all Dharmas my illumination by wisdom is inconceivable, my clarity of wisdom is inconceivable, my activity of wisdom is inconceivable, and my accumulation of wisdom is inconceivable.
“Venerable Bhagavat, in all Dharmas my engagement in the field of wisdom is inconceivable.
“Venerable Bhagavat, it is because of my correct knowledge, my correct examination, my correct view, and my correct comprehension of all Dharmas that I am named the great yakṣa general Saṃjñeya.
“Venerable Bhagavat, I will bring eloquence to the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu in order to beautify his words.
I will bring brilliance to his pores and develop in his body great power, strength, and diligence; I will make the illumination of his wisdom inconceivable; and I will make his memory comprehensive and make him greatly enthusiastic, so that the dharmabhāṇaka’s body will not become fatigued, his body’s faculties will be blissful, he will feel great joy, and so that for the sake of those beings who have planted good roots with hundreds of thousands of buddhas, this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light will remain for a long time in Jambudvīpa and will not soon vanish, and so that beings will hear this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light and will attain an inconceivable accumulation of wisdom, will possess an accumulation of merit, and in the future will experience inconceivable happiness among devas and humans for many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons, will be in the company of tathāgatas, will in a future time attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood, and will cease to experience the suffering of the hells, of birth as animals, or of the world of Yama.”
This concludes “Saṃjñeya,” the eleventh chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 12: The King’s Treatise: The Commitment of the Lord of Devas I pay homage to the bhagavat tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāñcana­prabhāsa­śrī.
I pay homage to Śākyamuni, who lights the lamp of the Dharma, the bhagavat tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha whose body is adorned by many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of qualities.
I pay homage to the great goddess Śrī, who has a perfection of immeasurable grains and a fortune of qualities.
I pay homage to the great goddess Sarasvatī, in whom is the unity of measureless qualities of wisdom.
“Then, at that time, King Balendraketu said to his son, King Ruciraketu, soon after he was enthroned and when he was the new sovereign, ‘Soon after I was enthroned, I received from my father, King Varendraketu, the treatise on kingship called The Commitment of the Lord of Devas.
For twenty thousand years I ruled in accordance with this treatise on kingship, The Commitment of the Lord of Devas.
Up until now, I have not been known to follow any ways that are not the Dharma for even an instant.
So, son, what is this treatise on kingship, The Commitment of the Lord of Devas?’
“Then, at that time, in that time, noble goddess, King Balendraketu taught extensively, through these verses, the treatise on kingship, The Commitment of the Lord of Devas, to his son King Ruciraketu: “ ‘I will teach the treatise on kingship Which benefits all beings, Cuts through all doubts, And destroys all wrongdoing.
“ ‘Each and every king, Have a joyful mind!
And with palms together, listen to All the commitments of the lord of devas.
“ ‘On this lord of mountains, Vajraprākara, The lords of the devas assembled, And the protectors of the world stood up In order to question the lord of Brahmās: “ ‘ “You, Brahmā, the principal deity, The one who is the lord over all devas, We pray that you cut through our doubts And cut through our concerns.
“ ‘ “Why is a king, who has been born In the human world, called a deva?
For what reason is a king Given the title of ‘son of the devas’?
“ ‘ “If he is a deva, then why is it that He is born into this world of humans, Becomes a lord of humans, And acts as a king for humans?”
“ ‘The protectors of the world asked Those questions of the lord of Brahmās, And that principal deity, Brahmā, Said these words to the protectors of the world: “ ‘ “The world protectors have thus Asked me such kinds of questions, So I will teach an excellent treatise In order to bring benefit to beings.
“ ‘ “I will describe the births Of kings within human existences And the causes through which They become the kings of their domains.
“ ‘ “Blessed by the lords of devas, He will enter the mother’s uterus, First, he is blessed by the devas, And afterward, he comes into the womb.
“ ‘ “Although born in the human world, He becomes a lord of humans.
As he is born from the devas, He is called ‘a son of the devas.’
“ ‘ “The deva lords of Trāyastriṃśa state, ‘You are the child of all the devas.’
They bestow upon him the right to be king And he emanates to become a lord of humans.
“ ‘ “He brings to an end all evil acts And destroys that which is not Dharma.
He establishes beings in good works In order to direct them to the paradises.
“ ‘ “The lord of men, whether A human or a gandharva, A caṇḍāla or a rākṣasa, Prevents wickedness.
“ ‘ “The lord of men is a father and mother For those who engage in good actions.
He has been blessed by the kings of devas To teach them the ripening of results.
“ ‘ “He has been blessed by the kings of devas In order to teach the ripened results Of the karma of performing good actions And performing bad actions in this life.
“ ‘ “Whenever a king does nothing about The wicked inhabitants in his realm And does not appropriately punish The people who are guilty of bad acts, “ ‘ “And ignores the evils that are done, Then unrighteousness will increase greatly, Conflicts and dishonesty Will subsequently arise in the land, “ ‘ “And the lords of devas will be disturbed Within their Trāyastriṃśa palace.
Whenever a king does nothing about The wicked inhabitants in his realm, “ ‘ “Then there will be terrible dishonesty, And dreadful people will vanquish his land.
The armies of adversaries will invade And will completely destroy that land, “ ‘ “And they will destroy property and families.
People will steal from one another, Using many forms of dishonesty, Whatever wealth has been accumulated.
“ ‘ “There are the duties of kingship, And if those activities are not carried out, Then he will destroy his own kingdom Like a king of elephants destroys a pond.
“ ‘ “Disastrous winds will blow, Disastrous rains will fall, And the sun, the moon, the planets, And lunar asterisms will bring disaster.
“ ‘ “In the land where the king is impassive, Seeds, harvests, flowers, and fruit Will fail to ripen properly And famines will occur.
“ ‘ “Whenever a king does nothing about The wicked inhabitants in his realm, Then the devas in their palaces Will at that time become displeased.
“ ‘ “All of those lords of devas Will be saying to one another, ‘This king has no righteousness; He is on the side of unrighteousness.’
“ ‘ “Such a king will before long Cause the devas to be disturbed, And because the devas are disturbed, His kingdom will be completely destroyed.
“ ‘ “Unrighteousness will arise in that land, And it will also be destroyed by weapons.
Dishonesty and conflicts And also illness will arise.
“ ‘ “The lords of devas will be enraged And the devas will abandon him.
The kingdom will be destroyed And the king will encounter misery.
“ ‘ “He will be separated from those he loves Whether they be brothers or sons.
He will even be separated from his beloved wife Or it will be that his daughter will die.
“ ‘ “There will be shooting stars that will fall, And similarly there will appear comets, And the armies of invading enemies And famines will drastically take place.
“ ‘ “His cherished minister and Cherished elephant will die.
Afterward, his cherished Camels will also die.
“ ‘ “People will steal from one another Homes, possessions, and wealth.
In this and that region, they will Strike one another with weapons.
“ ‘ “There will arise in those regions Fighting, quarreling, and dishonesty.
A demon will enter the kingdom And there will be dreadful illnesses.
“ ‘ “After that, even the recipients of Offerings will become unrighteous.
His court and his ministers Will also become unrighteous.
“ ‘ “Those individuals who are righteous Will constantly be punished.
If unrighteous individuals are honored And the righteous are punished, “ ‘ “Because the malevolent are loved and honored, And because the good are punished, In that place water, lunar asterisms, And wind, those three, will become agitated.
“ ‘ “If unrighteous beings are favored, There are three things that will be destroyed: The vital essence of the flavor of the Dharmas, The vitality of beings, and the fecundity of the earth.
“ ‘ “Through honoring evil people And dishonoring good people, There are three things that will occur: Death, lightning, and famine.
“ ‘ “Afterward, the vitality and flavor Of fruits and harvests will vanish, And in those regions there will be A multitude of people with illnesses.
“ ‘ “Although that land had fruits That were large and sweet, They will become bitter and hot, And they will become small.
“ ‘ “Games, amusements, and pleasures, Those things that previously had been enjoyed, Will be disliked and no longer pleasurable, And instead there will be dismay from hundreds of troubles.
“ ‘ “The luster and the vitality Of the harvests and fruits will perish, And they will not bring satisfaction To the body, the elements, or the senses.
“ ‘ “Beings will have bad complexions, Little strength, and will be emaciated.
Even though they eat a lot of food, They will not become satiated.
“ ‘ “They will afterward cease to have Strength, power, and diligence.
In that land, there will be Beings with weak diligence.
“ ‘ “There will be many sick beings Afflicted by various diseases.
There will planets and lunar asterisms That arise from various rākṣasas.
“ ‘ “The king who is not righteous, Who is on the side of unrighteousness, Will in the circle of the three worlds Be destructive for the three realms.
“ ‘ “When those on the side of the king Who perform evil acts are left alone, Then many of such evil actions Will arise within those lands.
“ ‘ “If the king ignores evil actions, He does not fulfill the purpose For which the lords of devas Blessed him to become a king.
“ ‘ “Through having done good actions, Beings are reborn in the paradises.
Through doing bad actions, they are Reborn as pretas, in hells, and as animals.
“ ‘ “Whenever a king does nothing about The wicked inhabitants in his realm, Then through those evil acts being done, Beings will fall from the Trāyastriṃśa paradise.
“ ‘ “If he is not acting as a king, Then he will also not be a son, And in the realm of his fathers, the deva kings, He will have become guilty of a crime.
“ ‘ “When a kingdom is being destroyed By extremely terrible dishonesty, It is for that reason that the lords of devas Blessed him to become a king in the human realm.
“ ‘ “A king is someone who manifests For beings the results of karma in that life.
He is someone who initiates good actions In order to cause evil acts to cease.
“ ‘ “Someone is called a king because their actions Are in order to teach the difference between The results that ripen from the karma Of having done good or having done bad.
“ ‘ “He was blessed by the multitudes of devas For the benefit of himself and the benefit of others, And for the benefit of the Dharma in that land, And all those devas are gladdened by him.
“ ‘ “To subdue the deceitful, evil people Who are inhabitants in his domains, And to benefit the Dharma in his kingdom, He will give away his life and his kingship.
“ ‘ “To accept unrighteousness And to knowingly pay it no attention Is a dreadful danger for the realm With which nothing else can compare.
“ ‘ “When there is the appearance of dishonesty, If those who are dishonest are not punished, Then afterward there will be in the land Extremely dreadful dishonest people.
“ ‘ “They will destroy that kingdom Like elephants do a great pond.
The lords of devas will also become angry, And it will bring ruin to the paradises.
“ ‘ “Everything in the land Will become pernicious.
Therefore, the evil actions of those who Are wicked should be successively subdued.
“ ‘ “He should protect the kingdom with righteousness, And he should never practice unrighteousness.
He should not become a sinful lord, Even if he has to give up his life.
“ ‘ “Toward his family and other people, Toward all the people in his kingdom, The king should not show favoritism Through which he will fall into bias.
“ ‘ “The renown of a king who is Righteous will fill the three worlds, And he will bring joy to the lords of devas Who are in the Trāyastriṃśa paradise.
“ ‘ “They will think, ‘Our son in Jambudvīpa Is in this way a righteous king.
He displays a Dharma kingdom, And establishes beings in good actions.’
“ ‘ “The king, through his good actions, Inspires beings in this world to think That the paradises are being filled With devas and the children of devas.
“ ‘ “Displaying there a Dharma kingdom Will cause the kings to rejoice.
The lords of devas will favor him, And they will protect that human king.
“ ‘ “The sun, the moon, and similarly The lunar asterisms will move perfectly.
The winds will arise at the proper times, And the rains will also come at the right time.
“ ‘ “There will be excellent harvests in the kingdom And likewise in the realms of the devas.
The devas and the children of devas Will fill the abodes of the devas.
“ ‘ “In that way, the monarch will Give up his own dear life In order to make the world happy And not give up the precious Dharma.
“ ‘ “The one who is adorned by good qualities Relies on being in possession of righteousness.
He constantly makes beings happy, And he constantly rejects bad actions.
“ ‘ “He protects the realm with righteousness, And he correctly teaches righteousness.
He establishes beings in good actions And turns them away from bad actions.
“ ‘ “When he correctly subjugates Those who commit bad actions, There will be good harvests in the kingdom And the king will have majesty.
“ ‘ “The king will be renowned And will protect the happiness of beings.” ’ ”
This concludes “The King’s Treatise: The Commitment of the Lord of Devas,” the twelfth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 13: Susaṃbhava “Whenever I was a cakravartin king, I gave away the earth with its oceans.
I offered the four continents Filled with jewels to the past jinas.
“Because I sought the Dharma body, There was nothing in the past that was pleasant And cherished that I did not give away, And in many eons, I even gave up my cherished life.
“Many countless eons ago, I was King Susaṃbhava Within the teaching of the sugata Ratnaśikhin, A sugata who had passed into nirvāṇa.
“He was a cakravartin who ruled the four continents, And he reigned over the land as far as the oceans.
At that time, the excellent king went to sleep In the royal palace for the teaching of the lord of jinas.
“In a dream, he heard the qualities of a buddha, And in the middle of his sleep, he clearly saw The dharmabhāṇaka Ratnoccaya Teaching this lord of the sūtras.
“That king awoke from his sleep, His entire body filled with joy.
He reverently left the royal capital And approached the excellent śrāvaka saṅgha.
“He made offerings to the Jina’s śrāvakas, And he questioned this ārya saṅgha About the dharmabhāṇaka Ratnoccaya: ‘Where is Ratnoccaya, the bhikṣu with qualities?’
“At that time, Ratnoccaya Was dwelling in another cave In a state of happiness, contemplating And reciting this king of sūtras.
“Just then they showed the king The dharmabhāṇaka Ratnoccaya, Shining with perfect, glorious magnificence And residing in another cave.
“There the dharmabhāṇaka Ratnoccaya, Who possessed the profound range of the jinas, Was constantly teaching the lord king of sūtras That is called The Sublime Golden Light.
“King Susaṃbhava bowed down To the feet of Ratnoccaya and said, ‘I pray to you, who has a face like the full moon, to teach The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.’
“When Ratnoccaya promised that king, Susaṃbhava, that he would do so, All the devas throughout all the worlds In the trichiliocosm became overjoyed.
“At that time, the lord of men sprinkled Precious water and scented water In a pure and superior place, Scattered flower petals, and arranged a throne.
“The king adorned that throne with many thousands Of parasols, banners, and rolls of silk.
The king scattered upon that throne Various kinds of excellent sandalwood.
“Devas, nāgas, asuras, kinnaras, Yakṣa lords, yakṣas, and mahoragas Rained down upon that throne A shower of divine coral tree flowers.
“Countless thousands of quintillions of devas Who longed for the Dharma arrived, And they scattered sal flowers When Ratnoccaya was brought forth.
“The dharmabhāṇaka Ratnoccaya Washed his body and wore clean robes, And when he approached that throne With his palms together, he bowed to it.
“The deva lords, the devas and devīs Residing in the sky, sent down a rain Of coral tree flowers and played Countless thousands of musical instruments.
“The dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu Ratnoccaya, Remembering countless thousands of millions Of buddhas in the ten directions, Mounted the throne and sat upon it.
“Thinking of all beings with kindness And developing a compassionate mind, At that time he taught this sūtra To that king, Susaṃbhava.
“The king bowed with palms together And rejoiced in each single word.
Through the Dharma’s power he shed tears, And his body was permeated with joy.
“In order to make an offering to this sūtra, At that time King Susaṃbhava held up A king of precious wish-fulfilling jewels And made a prayer for the benefit of all beings: “ ‘May there rain down on this Jambudvīpa Jewelry that contains the seven jewels And whatever great wealth that will bring Happiness to the beings in this Jambudvīpa.’
“Just then a rain of the seven jewels, Of armlets, necklaces, and excellent earrings, And similarly, food, drink, and clothing Rained down upon the four continents.
“When King Susaṃbhava saw That precious rain fall on Jambudvīpa, He offered the four continents that were Filled with jewels to the teaching of Ratnaśikhin.
“I, the Tathāgata Śākyamuni, was The king named Susaṃbhava, And at that time I offered up this earth With its four continents filled with jewels.
“The dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu Ratnoccaya, Who was the one at that time who taught This sūtra to King Susaṃbhava, Became the Tathāgata Akṣobhya.
“Because of the good karma from Listening at that time to this sūtra And rejoicing in each single word, Because of rejoicing and hearing the Dharma, “I always have a body that is golden in color, Has the signs of a hundred merits, Is beautiful to behold and a pleasure for the eyes, And when seen gladdens ten billion devas and gladdens beings.
“For ninety-nine trillion eons I became a cakravartin king, And for many hundreds of thousands of eons I have experienced being the king of a realm.
“For countless eons I have been Śakras, and likewise I have been lords of Brahmās with peaceful minds, And I have attained the unquantifiable ten strengths, The extent of which can never be known.
“Through the immeasurable accumulation of abundant merit From my hearing and rejoicing in this sūtra, I attained the enlightenment that I had aspired to, And I also attained the sublime Dharma body.”
This concludes “Susaṃbhava,” the thirteenth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 14: The Protection Given by Yakṣas “Great goddess Śrī, any noble man or noble woman who has faith and wishes to make an inconceivably, extremely vast and great offering of requisites to the past, future, and present buddha bhagavats, and wishes to know the profound field of activity of the past, future, and present buddhas, whether in a temple or in a wilderness, in whatever place The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light is being correctly taught, in that place they should, with an undoubting and undistracted mind, pay attention and listen to this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Then the Bhagavat, in order to describe this extensively to the assembly, recited these verses: “Someone who wishes to make an Inconceivable offering to all the buddhas, And wishes to know the profound Field of activity of all the buddhas, “Should go to the place, whether It is a temple or a dwelling, Where is taught this sūtra of The Sublime Golden Light.
“This sūtra is inconceivable; Its ocean of qualities is endless, And it liberates all beings From the oceans of many sufferings.
“I see the beginning of this sūtra And also its middle and its conclusion.
This lord of sūtras is extremely profound.
There is no analogy that exists for it.
“All of the particles that exist In the Ganges and on the earth, In the oceans and in the sky, Cannot serve as an analogy for it.
“The entrance to the Dharma realm Should be entered at that time.
Jina Śākyamuni should be seen In the center of a stūpa, “Which is the profound, enduring stūpa That is the embodiment of the Dharma, Teaching this sūtra perfectly With a voice that is beautiful.
“May the happiness of devas And of humans be experienced For as many countless, innumerable Millions of eons as there are.
“Whoever listens to this sūtra Should think they will accomplish My inconceivable accumulation of merit; At that time they should know this to be so.
“Someone should, in order to listen to this sūtra, Be able to endure the intense pain Of crossing over a hundred-yojana-wide Moat filled with a blazing inferno.
“Then as soon as they enter into The temple or the dwelling, Their bad karma will be eliminated And all the qualities of nightmares, “Harm from planets and lunar asterisms, And terrible evil spirits and demons Will be entirely driven away The moment that they enter there.
“There the dharmabhāṇaka should make a seat That is in the form of a lotus Exactly as has been revealed By nāga kings in a dream.
“Having sat upon that seat, They should teach this sūtra, Write it out, and read it out loud, And similarly, they should learn it.
“After they have risen from that seat, Even if they go to another land, Miraculous manifestations Will appear on that seat.
“Sometimes the form of the Dharmabhāṇaka will appear there, And sometimes the form of a buddha, Sometimes that of a bodhisattva, “Sometimes that of Samantabhadra, Sometimes that of Mañjuśrī, And sometimes that of Maitreya Will appear upon that seat.
“Sometimes only light will appear.
Sometimes devas will appear— They will appear there briefly, And then they will disappear.
“If a buddha is seen, there will be praise.
Everything will be accomplished.
There will be perfect grain and good fortune.
This is an omen emanated by the Buddha.
“There will be victory and glory and fame.
Those who are adversaries will be repulsed.
The opposing armies of enemies will defeated.
Enemies will be vanquished in battle.
“All nightmares will come to an end.
All bad actions will be eliminated; All bad actions will be brought to an end, There will be victory in battle.
“One will have fame that will spread Throughout the entirety of this Jambudvīpa.
All the enemies that he has Will be completely defeated.
“Enemies will constantly be vanquished.
All bad actions will be abandoned.
There will be victory in battle, Freedom from enemies, and perfect joy.
“The Lord of Brahmās, the Lord of Trāyastriṃśa, And similarly the guardians of the world; Vajrapāṇi who is the lord of yakṣas; Saṃjñeya, the supreme victorious leader; “The lord of nāgas, Anavatapta; And likewise Sāgara, The lord of kinnaras and lord of asuras; And also the lord of the garuḍas— “Those and also all such others, Every one of all of the devas— Will constantly make offerings to The inconceivable stūpa of the Dharma, And they will feel great joy on seeing Beings who have reverence.
“The supreme lords of the devas Will all in their minds be thinking, And every one of the devas Will be saying to one another, “ ‘Look at them, they who have Accumulated merit, glory, and majesty!
Those humans who have developed Good roots have arrived here.
“ ‘They have come here To listen to this profound sūtra.
They have reverence for the stūpa of the Dharma, With their faith that is inconceivable.
“ ‘They have compassion for the world And they bring benefit to beings.
They are vessels for the flavor of the sublime Dharma That comes from the profound Dharmas.
“ ‘They have entered through The entrance to the Dharma realm.
They who listen to this sublime goodness, The Sūtra of the Sublime Golden Light, “ ‘Have in the past made offerings To a hundred thousand buddhas; It is because of those good roots That they are listening to the sūtra.’
“All the lords and kings of devas— Sarasvatī, and similarly Śrī and Vaiśravaṇa, And similarly the Four Mahārājas, “And the hundred thousand yakṣas Who have great might and miraculous powers— All of them in the four directions Will give them perfect protection.
“Indra, Soma, and Yama, Vāyu and Varuṇa, Skanda, Viṣṇu, Sarasvatī, Consumer of Burnt Offerings, and Prajāpati, “Those who with great power subjugate adversaries, All those protectors of the world, Day and night, never inattentive, Will give them their protection.
“The yakṣa lords that have great might— Nārāyaṇa and Maheśvara, Saṃjñeya, and also the rest of The other twenty-eight yakṣas, “And the hundred thousand yakṣas With their great might and miraculous powers— Will give them their protection From all terror and fears.
“Vajrapāṇi, the lord of yakṣas, With five hundred yakṣas And all the bodhisattvas, Will give them his protection.
“Maṇibhadra, the lord of yakṣas, And similarly, Pūrṇabhadra, Kumbhīra and Aṭāvika, Piṅgala and Kapila— “Each of those lords of yakṣas, Accompanied by five hundred yakṣas— Will give their protection to Those who listen to this sūtra.
“Gandharva and Citrasena, Jinarāja and Jinarṣabha, Maṇikaṇṭha and Nikaṇṭha, And similarly Varṣādhipati; “Mahāgrāsa and Mahākāla, And similarly also Svarṇakeśin, Pāñcika and Chagalapāda, And similarly Mahābhāga; “Praṇālin and Dharma Protector, Markaṭa and also Vāli, Sūciroma and Sūryamitra, And similarly Ratnakeśa; “Mahāpraṇālin and Nakula, Kāmaśreṣṭha and Candana, Nāgāyana and Haimavata, And similarly Sātāgirista— “All of them, who have great might, Subjugate adversaries, and have miraculous power— Will give their protection to Those who listen to this sūtra.
“The nāga lord Anavatapta, And similarly Sāgara, Both Elapatra and Mucilinda, And Nanda and Upananda, “With a hundred thousand nāgas With great might and miraculous powers, Will give them their protection From all terrors and fears.
“Bali, Rāhu, and Namuci, Vemacitra and Saṃvara, Prahrāda and Kharaskandha, And similarly the other lords of asuras, “With a hundred thousand asuras With great might and miraculous powers, Will give them their protection From all terrors and fears.
“Hārītī, the mother of spirits, With her five hundred children, Will give them their protection While they sit, sleep, or are intoxicated.
“Caṇḍā and Caṇḍālikā, And similarly the yakṣiṇīs Caṇḍikā, Armed with Spear and Kūṭadantī, And also Seeing All Sentient Beings— “All of them, who have great might, Subjugate adversaries, and have miraculous power— Will give their protection to them Everywhere in the four directions.
“Sarasvatī and all the other Countless numbers of goddesses, And similarly Śrī and All of the other goddesses— “The goddess of the earth and The goddesses of harvests, fruits, and forests; Those who dwell in parks, trees, and caityas; And the goddesses of the wind— “Every one of those goddesses, With their minds filled with joy, Will here give their protection To those who delight in this sūtra.
“They will bestow on those beings Life and color and strength, And will constantly adorn them with perfect Glory and merit and magnificence.
“They will end all harm from The planets and the lunar asterisms.
They will bring to an end all troubles, Bad actions, and nightmares.
“The goddess of the earth herself, Who has depth and great strength, Will be satiated by the flavor of The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
“For sixty-eight thousand Times a hundred yojanas, As far down as the vajra foundation, The fertility of the earth will increase.
“The fertility of the earth that has sunk A whole hundred yojanas below Will rise back upward And enrich the surfaces.
“Every one of all those devas, through The power of listening to the sūtra, Will be satiated by the flavor of The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.
“They will become perfectly brilliant, And similarly they will have strength.
They will be happy and satisfied.
Throughout the entirety of Jambudvīpa, “The devas of fruits, harvests, and forests Will be satisfied by various flavors, And they will be completely delighted, Satisfied by the flavor of the sūtra.
“Then the fruits and the harvests, And the various kinds of flowers And the various kinds of fruit trees, Will all develop perfectly.
“All the fruit trees, The parks, and the forests Will blossom with flowers Emitting their various aromas.
“All the plants and trees That have various kinds of flowers And various kinds of fruits Will grow upon the earth.
“Throughout the entirety of this Jambudvīpa, There will be innumerable nāga maidens Whose minds will become filled with joy, And they will come to where the ponds are.
“And there will grow in all the ponds A variety of night lotuses, Red lotuses, and similarly Blue lotuses and white lotuses.
“In the sky there will be no smoke, And it will not be covered by clouds.
There will be no darkness and no dust, And everywhere will be completely bright.
“A bright and beautiful net of light rays That has a thousand rays of sunlight Brings the most perfect joy With its profound brightness.
“Even that lord, the deva Sūrya, Dwelling in his divine palace Made of Jambū River gold, Will gain satisfaction through this sūtra.
“When Lord Sūrya is gladdened, He will shine onto Jambudvīpa, And he will completely illuminate it With an infinite net of light rays.
“Simply through his rising, He will shine a net of light rays, And the lotuses that fill A variety of ponds will open.
“Throughout the entirety of this Jambudvīpa, The various flowers, fruits, and herbs Will perfectly, completely ripen, And the entire earth will be satisfied.
“The moon and the sun also Will at that time be brighter.
The lunar asterisms will move perfectly, And similarly so will the winds.
“Throughout all of Jambudvīpa There will be excellent harvests.
Wherever this sūtra is present, That kingdom will be preeminent.”
This concludes “The Protection Given by Yakṣas,” the fourteenth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 15: The Prophecy to Ten Thousand Devas When the Bhagavat had said that, the noble goddess Bodhisattvasamuccayā asked him, “Venerable Bhagavat, through what cause and what condition, and through what accomplishment and accumulation of planting good roots, have Jvalanāntara­tejo­rāja and these other ten thousand devas now come from the Trāyastriṃśa paradise, having heard the prophecy to these three sublime beings?
“It was thus: this excellent being, the bodhisattva Ruciraketu, in a future time, after many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of asaṃkhyeyas of eons have passed, will attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of buddhahood in the world realm Suvarṇaprabhā.
He will appear in that world as the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha, the one with wisdom and virtuous conduct, the sugata, the one who knows the world’s beings, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the bhagavat by the name of Suvarṇa­ratnākaracchatra­kūṭa.
“When the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Suvarṇa­ratnākaracchatra­kūṭa has passed into nirvāṇa and his Dharma has come to an end and his teachings have completely come to an end, at that time, this boy by the name of Rūpyaketu will appear as the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha by the name of Suvarṇa­jambudhvajakāñca­nābha in the world realm called Virajadhvajā.
“When the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Suvarṇa­jambudhvajakāñca­nābha has passed into nirvāṇa and his Dharma has come to an end and his teachings have completely come to an end, then this boy by the name of Rūpyaprabha will be the successor of that tathāgata, attaining the highest enlightenment of complete buddhahood in the world realm called Immaculate Banner, appearing as the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha, the one with wisdom and virtuous conduct, the sugata, the one who knows the world’s beings, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the bhagavat by the name of Radiance of a Hundred Golden Lights.
“All of that was the Bhagavat’s prophecy of their attainment of the highest, most complete enlightenment.
“Venerable Bhagavat, Jvalanāntara­tejo­rāja and the rest of those ten thousand devas have not had such a great, extensive bodhisattva conduct as that.
“It is not said that they have previously practiced the six perfections.
“It is not said that they have previously given away their arms, legs, eyes, the supreme limb of the head, or their beloved sons, wives, and daughters.
“It is not said that they have previously given away wealth, grain, cowries, gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryl, conchs, crystals, coral, silver, or gold nuggets.
“It is not said that they have previously given away food, drink, steeds, clothes, beds, seats, houses, divine palaces, parks, ponds, or pools.
“It is not said that they have previously given away elephants, oxen, stallions, male servants, or female servants.
“Countless hundreds of thousands of quintillions of bodhisattvas have, before they received from buddha bhagavats their names as tathāgatas, made countless hundreds of thousands of various offerings to countless hundreds of thousands of quintillions of tathāgatas for countless hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons.
They had given away all the things that could be given away.
They had given away their arms, legs, eyes, the supreme limb of the head, and their beloved sons, wives, and daughters.
They had given away wealth, grain, cowries, gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryl, conchs, crystals, coral, silver, and gold nuggets.
They had given away food, drink, steeds, clothes, beds, seats, houses, divine palaces, parks, pleasure groves, ponds, pools, elephants, oxen, stallions, male servants, and female servants.
They had successively completed all the six perfections and, having successively completed all the six perfections, they experienced many hundreds of thousands of kinds of happiness.
“Venerable Bhagavat, through what cause and what condition, through what manner of developing good roots, have Jvalanāntara­tejo­rāja and the rest of these ten thousand devas who have come here to hear the Dharma from the Bhagavat been prophesied to successively appear, Bhagavat, in a future time, after many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of asaṃkhyeya eons, in a world realm called Śālendra­dhvajāgravatī, in the same family, in the same clan, and with the same name, to attain the highest, most complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood as ten thousand buddhas by the name of Prasanna­vadanotpala­gandha­kūṭa, becoming tathāgatas, arhats, samyak­saṃbuddhas, with wisdom and virtuous conduct, sugatas, knowers of the world’s beings, unsurpassable guides who tame beings, teachers of devas and humans, buddhas, and bhagavats?”
When she had asked that, the Bhagavat said, “Noble goddess, Jvalanāntara­tejo­rāja and the rest of these ten thousand devas do have a development of good roots, do have a cause, and do have deeds that they have accomplished and accumulated, through which they have come here from the paradise of Trāyastriṃśa in order to hear the Dharma.
“Noble goddess, when they heard the prophecy of the enlightenment of these three excellent beings, as soon as they heard it, they gained reverence for, delight in, and trust in this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, and just through that they had minds that were as completely pure as stainless beryl.
They had profound, completely clear minds like pure, extremely vast, and expansive space.
They possessed an immeasurable accumulation of merit.
“Noble goddess, Jvalanāntara­tejo­rāja and the rest of these ten thousand devas, in just that way, as soon as they heard this Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light, gained reverence for and trust in it.
In just that way, they had minds that were as completely pure as stainless beryl, and therefore they attained the level of prophecy.
“Noble goddess, it is through this accumulation of good roots and through the power of previous prayers that Jvalanāntara­tejo­rāja and the rest of these ten thousand devas have now obtained the prophecy of their highest, most complete enlightenment.”
This concludes “The Prophecy to Ten Thousand Devas,” the fifteenth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 16: Ending Illness “Noble goddess, in the past, in a time gone by—an inconceivable, vast number, more innumerable than an asaṃkhyeya of eons ago—at that time, in that time, the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha, the one with wisdom and virtuous conduct, the sugata, the one who knows the world’s beings, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the bhagavat by the name of Ratnaśikhin appeared in the world.
“Noble goddess, at that time, in that time, after the Tathāgata Arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Ratnaśikhin had passed into nirvāṇa and the Dharma had vanished and there was just the outer appearance of the Dharma, there was King Sureśvara­prabha, who followed the Dharma, who was a Dharma king, who ruled the kingdom through the Dharma and not through that which was not the Dharma, and who was like a father and mother to the beings who dwelled there.
“Noble goddess, at that time, in that time, in the kingdom of King Sureśvara­prabha, there was a head merchant by the name of Jaṭiṃdhara.
He was a doctor, a physician, perfectly skilled in the humors, and was endowed with all eight branches of the Āyurveda tradition.
“O noble goddess, at that time, in that time, the head merchant Jaṭiṃdhara had a son named Jalavāhana, who had an excellent body; was attractive and handsome; had a perfect, well-developed, excellent complexion; was learned in various treatises; had the understanding of all treatises; and was perfectly trained in letters, numbers, finger-counting, and calculations.
“Noble goddess, at that time, in that time, many hundreds of thousands of beings living in the kingdom of King Sureśvara­prabha were afflicted by various illnesses, tormented by various illnesses, and were experiencing severe, terrible, unendurable, unpleasant sensations of suffering.
“Noble goddess, at that time, in that time, there arose in Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, great compassion for those many hundreds of thousands of beings who were afflicted by various illnesses and tormented by various illnesses.
He thought, ‘Those beings are experiencing severe, terrible, unendurable, unpleasant sensations of suffering, and my father, this head merchant Jaṭiṃdhara, who is a doctor, a physician, perfectly skilled in the humors, and endowed with all eight branches of the Āyurveda tradition, has become old, decrepit, and feeble.
He has reached an advanced age, walks leaning on a stick, and is unable to go to the villages, the towns, the market towns, the countryside, the realm, or the royal capital.
Therefore, in order to free those many hundreds of thousands of beings from the afflictions of various illnesses and the torments of various illnesses, I will go to my father, Jaṭiṃdhara, and question him so as to become skilled in the humors in order to heal illness.
Having questioned him so as to become skilled in the humors, I will go to the villages, towns, market towns, countryside, realm, and royal capital.
When I go there, I will free the many hundreds of thousands of beings from illness.’
“Noble goddess, at that time, in that time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, went to his father, Jaṭiṃdhara, and having come to him, he bowed down his head in homage at his father’s feet, and with his palms together he sat to one side.
When he had seated himself to one side, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, recited these verses to his father, Jaṭiṃdhara, questioning him about skill in the humors: “ ‘How are physical powers destroyed And how do the humors change?
At what times do illnesses Arise within physical beings?
“ ‘What foods should be eaten or not At different times for health, So that within someone’s body The body’s heat will not be harmed?
“ ‘What are the medical practices For healing the illnesses That arise from air, from bile, From phlegm, and from their combination?
“ ‘During which times does the air move, During which times does the bile move, And during which times does the phlegm move, Through which there will be harm to humans?’
“Then the head merchant, Jaṭiṃdhara, taught his son Jalavāhana skill in the humors by reciting these verses: “ ‘Know three months to be summer and three months the autumn, And there are three that are winter and three that are spring.
Similarly, there are said to be six seasons, And there are twelve months in one year.
“ ‘Know that the months are divided into threes, And that pairs of months are taught.
Food and drink are digested accordingly.
Thus the physicians teach humors and time.
“ ‘The faculties and the humors Are in groups within each year.
It is when the faculties transform That various illnesses arise in beings.
“ ‘Know that the physician must be skilled In the groups of three and four months, The six times and the six humors, And the food, drink, and medicines that correspond.
“ ‘Illness that is primarily air arises in the summer.
That which arises in the autumn is the movement of bile.
Similarly, during the time of winter it is the aggregation, And illness that is primarily phlegm arises in spring.
“ ‘In summer: oily, warm, salty, and sour tastes; In autumn: the sweet, the oily, and the cool; In winter: the sweet, the oily, and the sour; And in the time of spring, the astringent, pungent, and bitter.
“ ‘That which is primarily phlegm arises immediately after eating.
That which is primarily bile arises during digestion.
That which is primarily air arises immediately after digestion.
That which is the movement of all three humors is like that.
“ ‘That which has the nature of air is healed by nutrition.
Laxative medicines are what dispel bile illness.
Aggregate illnesses will accord with all three.
For the class of phlegm, give emetic medicines.
“ ‘Know the groups that are primarily Air, bile, aggregation, or phlegm.
Rely upon the medicines, food, and drink For whichever time, humor, and body.’
“Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, through just this inquiry into skill in the humors became learned in all the eight branches of the Āyurveda.
“Noble goddess, at that time, in that time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, went throughout all the villages, towns, market towns, countryside, realm, and the royal capital in the kingdom of King Sureśvara­prabha, and he said, ‘I will be a doctor for you many hundreds of thousands of beings who are afflicted by various illnesses and tormented by various illnesses.
I promise to be your doctor, and I will free you from your various illnesses and bring you relief.’
“Noble goddess, when all those many hundreds of thousands of beings heard those words spoken by Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, they immediately felt great joy.
They found relief and had inconceivable joy, happiness, and delight.
“At that time, in that time, those many hundreds of thousands of beings who were afflicted by various illnesses and tormented by various illnesses were completely freed from their illness and became healthy.
When they became healthy, they had the same power, strength, and vigor as before.
“At that time, in that time, all those who were afflicted with severe illnesses among the many hundreds of thousands of beings that were afflicted by various illnesses and tormented by various illnesses went to Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son.
Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, cured all those beings of all their illnesses by using whatever medical treatments he had given the many hundreds of thousands of beings that were afflicted by various illnesses and tormented by various illnesses.
They became free of illness, or their illness was diminished and they became healthy, and they had the same power, strength, and vigor as before.
“Noble goddess, at that time, in that time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, freed from their various illnesses the many hundreds of thousands of beings who were afflicted by various illnesses and tormented by various illnesses throughout all the villages, towns, market towns, countryside, realm, and the royal capital in the kingdom of King Sureśvara­prabha.”
This concludes “Ending Illness,” the sixteenth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 17: The Story of the Fish Guided by Jalavāhana “And so, noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, had cured the illnesses in the kingdom of King Sureśvara­prabha, so that there were few illnesses and people had the enthusiasm and physical strength they had previously possessed.
All the beings in the kingdom of King Sureśvara­prabha were happy, enjoyed amusements, performed acts of generosity, and created merit.
They praised Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, saying, ‘May Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, be victorious!
May he be victorious!
He is the king of healing, who heals the illnesses of all beings.
He is the visible presence of a bodhisattva, and he knows all the eight branches of the Āyurveda.’
“Noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, had a wife by the name of Jalāmbuja­garbhā.
“Noble goddess, the wife, Jalāmbuja­garbhā, had two sons.
The name of one was Jalāmbara and the name of the other was Jalagarbha.
“Noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, traveled with his two sons successively through the villages, towns, market towns, countryside, realm, and the royal capital.
“Noble goddess, at another time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, went into the wilderness.
In that wilderness he saw carnivores—dogs, jackals, crows, and other birds—that were hurrying toward a lake in that wilderness, and he wondered, ‘Why are these carnivores—dogs, jackals, and so on, up to birds—hurrying in that direction?’
Then he also thought, ‘I will go in the direction that the dogs, jackals, crows, and other birds are rushing.’
“Noble goddess, then Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, went along in that way until he eventually came to the lake in the wilderness where they were going.
Ten thousand fish lived in that great lake. He saw that that many hundreds of the fish had no water, and he felt great compassion for them.
Then he saw emerging from a tree the upper half of the body of a goddess.
The goddess said to Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, ‘Excellent, noble son, excellent.
Why is that? Because your name is Jalavāhana, you must give water to these fish.
You are called Jalavāhana for two reasons, because you bring water and because you give water.
Therefore, act in accordance with your name!’
“Jalavāhana asked the goddess, ‘Goddess, how many of these fish are there?’
“The goddess replied, ‘A full ten thousand fish.’
“Then, noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, developed an even greater motivation of compassion.
“Noble goddess, at that time, there was just a little water left in that great lake in the wilderness, and those ten thousand fish were close to death, deprived of water, and rushing and darting around.
“Noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, ran in all four directions.
In whatever direction Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, went, those ten thousand fish looked piteously in that direction at Jalavāhana.
“Noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, again ran in all four directions but did not find water, so then he looked into the four directions and saw many trees that were not very far away.
He climbed those trees and cut off branches, Carrying those tree branches, he went back to the great lake, and there he created a very cool shade for those ten thousand fish.
“Then, noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, went searching for the river that flowed into that lake.
Wherever he ran in the four directions, he did not find the river that flowed into the lake.
He hurriedly followed a dried-up riverbed.
There was a great river called Jalāgamā, and it was the waters of that river that had flowed into that lake in the wilderness.
At that time, a wicked being, in order to obtain those ten thousand fish, had caused the river to flow over a great cliff in that area so that subsequently there would be no water flowing to the fish.
When Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, saw that, he thought, ‘Not even a thousand people could make the course of this river flow to that lake, so how would I alone be able to?’
He then returned.
“Then, noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, hurriedly went to King Sureśvara­prabha.
Having reached him, he bowed down his head to the feet of King Sureśvara­prabha, seated himself to one side, and told his story: ‘I had eliminated illness in all the villages, towns, and market towns within Your Majesty’s domain.
In a certain place, there is a lake called Aṭavīsaṃbhavā, in which live ten thousand fish. They lack water and are being tormented by the sun.
Just as I did for human beings, I wish to save the lives of those who have been born as animals.
Therefore, Your Majesty, I request twenty elephants from you.’
“King Sureśvara­prabha gave his ministers the command: ‘Give the great king of doctors twenty elephants!’
“The ministers said to him, ‘Great being!
Go to the elephant pen, take away twenty elephants, and bring benefit and happiness to beings!’
“Then, noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, with his sons Jalāmbara and Jalagarbha, led away twenty elephants and obtained from the elephant keepers one hundred ox-leather bags, and then they returned, going to where the great river Jalāgamā flowed.
They filled those bags with water, loaded them onto the elephants, and hurried back to the lake in the wilderness.
When they arrived there, they took down the water from the elephants, and from all four directions they filled the lake with water.
As Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, walked in the four directions, wherever he went, the ten thousand fish sped there.
“Then, noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, wondered, ‘Why are the ten thousand fish speeding to wherever I am?’
He also thought, ‘These ten thousand fish are definitely tormented by the fire of hunger and are begging me for food, so I will give them food.’
“Then, noble goddess, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, said to his son Jalāmbara, ‘Mount the fastest one of these elephants, ride as quickly as you can to our home, and say to your grandfather, the head merchant, “O grandfather, Jalavāhana has said, ‘Put together as one all the food that my parents, brothers, sisters, male servants, female servants, and workmen have at home, and send it to me quickly in the hands of Jalāmbara riding the elephant!’ ” ’
“Then the boy Jalāmbara, riding that elephant, rode and galloped as quickly as he could and came to his home.
Arriving there, he told his story in detail.
Then the boy Jalāmbara loaded onto the elephant all that combined food that he had been told to obtain, and he rode that elephant to the lake in the empty wilderness.
“Jalavāhana was delighted to see his son Jalāmbara, received the food from his son, divided it, and scattered it in the lake, satisfying those ten thousand fish.
“He thought, ‘At another time, in a solitary place, I heard from a bhikṣu reading the Mahāyāna that someone who hears the name of the Tathāgata Ratnaśikhin at the time of death will be reborn in a happy existence in a higher world.
So I will teach the fish the profound Dharma of dependent origination and also recite the name of the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Ratnaśikhin.’
“At that time, the beings in Jambudvīpa had two views.
Some had faith in the Mahāyāna and some disparaged it.
“Then, at that time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, stood in the lake up to his knees and recited: ‘Homage to the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Ratnaśikhin.
Previously, when the Tathāgata Ratnaśikhin was practicing bodhisattva conduct, he made this prayer: “May anyone in the ten directions who hears my name at the time of their death, after their passing be reborn with the good fortune of becoming devas in Trāyastriṃśa.” ’
“Then Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, taught this Dharma to those who had been reborn as animals: ‘Because this exists, that is produced; because this is born, that is born.
In that way, because of the factor of ignorance, there is formation; because of the factor of formation, there is consciousness; because of the factor of consciousness, there is name and form; because of the factor of name and form, there are the six āyatanas; because of the factor of the six āyatanas, there is contact; because of the factor of contact, there is sensation; because of the factor of sensation, there is craving; because of the factor of craving, there is grasping; because of the factor of grasping, there is becoming; because of the factor of becoming, there is birth; because of the factor of birth, there is aging and death, misery, lamenting, suffering, unhappiness, and distress.
In that way there is produced this great mass of nothing but suffering.
“ ‘Thus, through the cessation of ignorance, formation ceases, and so on, until in that way this great mass of nothing but suffering ceases.’
“Noble goddess, in that way, at that time, in that time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, recited those words of the Dharma to those who had been reborn as animals.
Then, together with his sons, Jalāmbara and Jalagarbha, he returned to his home.
“At another time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, ate a great feast and became intoxicated from alcohol, and then went to sleep in his bed.
At that time, in that time, there appeared a great omen.
When that night had passed, it was time for the ten thousand fish to die, and they were reborn with the good fortune of becoming devas in Trāyastriṃśa.
As soon as they were born there, this manner of thought arose in their minds: ‘Through what good karma as a cause have we been reborn among the devas of Trāyastriṃśa?’
Then they thought, ‘We were ten thousand fish in Jambudvīpa.
We had been reborn as animals, but Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, satisfied us with much water and the most excellent food, and then he taught us the profound Dharma of dependent origination and recited the name of the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Ratnaśikhin.
It is through that good quality as a cause and as a condition that we have been reborn here among the Trāyastriṃśa devas.
We must go to where Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, is and, after arriving there, make offerings to him.’
“Then those ten thousand devas vanished from among the Trāyastriṃśa devas and arrived at the home of Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son.
“At that time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, was sleeping on his bed, and those devas placed ten thousand pearl necklaces above his head.
They placed a hundred thousand pearl necklaces in front of his feet.
They placed a hundred thousand pearl necklaces to his right.
They placed a hundred thousand pearl necklaces to his left.
They also sent down a great rain of coral tree flowers that came up to the knees.
They also played divine music that woke up everyone in Jambudvīpa.
Then those ten thousand devas went up into the sky and sent down a rain of coral tree flowers here and there throughout the domain of King Sureśvara­prabha.
Then they went to the great lake in the empty wilderness and sent down a great rain of coral tree flowers onto that great lake.
Then they vanished from there and returned to their paradise, where they delighted and amused themselves with the five sensory pleasures, enjoyed pleasures, and experienced splendor and good fortune.
“In Jambudvīpa, at dawn, King Sureśvara­prabha saw that these signs had occurred, and he asked his astrologers and prime ministers, ‘Why did these signs appear last night?’
“They answered, ‘Your Majesty should know this: a rain of forty thousand pearl necklaces and also a rain of divine coral tree flowers fell in the home of Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son.’
“King Sureśvara­prabha said to his ministers, ‘You go and summon Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, with pleasant words.’
“Then the astrologers and prime ministers went to the home of Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, and having arrived they said to Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, ‘King Sureśvara­prabha is summoning you.’
“Then Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, went with the prime ministers to King Sureśvara­prabha.
“King Sureśvara­prabha said to him, ‘Jalavāhana, such kinds of signs appeared last night.
Do you know why there were those signs?’
“Then Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, said to King Sureśvara­prabha, ‘Your Majesty, I know that the time of death definitely came for those ten thousand fish.’
“The king asked, ‘How do you know that, Jalavāhana?’
“ ‘Your Majesty,’ said Jalavāhana, ‘I will send Jalāmbara to that lake to see whether those ten thousand fish are dead or alive.’
“ ‘Do that!’ commanded the king.
“Then Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, said to his son Jalāmbara, ‘Son, go to see whether the ten thousand fish in the lake in the empty wilderness have died or not.’
“Then the son, Jalāmbara, went as quickly as he could to that great lake in the empty wilderness and saw that the time of death had come for those ten thousand fish and that a great rain of coral tree flowers had fallen there.
He returned and said to his father, ‘Their time of death had come.’
“Then Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, having heard those words, went to King Sureśvara­prabha and told him in detail what had occurred: ‘The time of death had come to all those ten thousand fish, and they were reborn among the devas of Trāyastriṃśa.
It is through their and my power that those good signs appeared last night.
There also fell a rain of forty thousand strings of pearls and divine coral tree flowers in my home.’
“Then the king was happy, pleased, and overjoyed.”
The Bhagavat then said to the goddess Bodhisattvasamuccayā, “Noble goddess, do not hold the view of thinking that at that time, in that time, King Sureśvara­prabha was anyone else.
Why is that?
It is because during that time the Śākya Daṇḍapāṇi was King Sureśvara­prabha.
“Noble goddess, do not hold the view of thinking that at that time, in that time, the head merchant Jaṭiṃdhara was anyone else.
Why is that?
It is because during that time King Śuddhodana was the head merchant Jaṭiṃdhara.
“Noble goddess, do not hold the view of thinking that at that time, in that time, Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son, was anyone else.
Why is that?
It is because during that time I was Jalavāhana, the head merchant’s son.
“Noble goddess, do not hold the view of thinking that at that time, in that time, his wife, Jalāmbuja­garbhā, was anyone else.
Why is that?
It is because during that time the Śākya maiden Gopā was his wife, Jalāmbuja­garbhā.
“Rāhula was at that time the son Jalāmbara, and Ānanda was at that time the son Jalagarbha.
“Noble goddess, do not hold the view of thinking that at that time, in that time, the ten thousand fish were anyone else.
Why is that?
It is because during that time Jvalanāntara­tejo­rāja and the rest of these ten thousand devas were those ten thousand fish that I satisfied with water and excellent food, to whom I taught the profound Dharma of dependent origination, and to whom I recited the name of the tathāgata arhat samyak­saṃbuddha Ratnaśikhin.
It is because of that good action as a cause that they arrived here and that I have given them the prophecy of their attainment of the highest, most complete enlightenment.
Because they listened to the Dharma reverently with complete delight, trust, and supreme joy, they have received their prophecies and names.
“Noble goddess, do not hold the view of thinking that at that time, in that time, the tree goddess was anyone else.
Why is that?
It is because during that time you were that tree goddess.
“Noble goddess, know through this teaching that while I continued in saṃsāra, I ripened many beings for enlightenment, and they have all obtained prophecies of their attainment of the highest, most complete enlightenment.”
This concludes “The Story of the Fish Guided by Jalavāhana,” the seventeenth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 18: The Gift of the Body to a Tigress “Moreover, noble goddess, bodhisattvas give away their bodies in order to benefit others.
What is that like?
“The Bhagavat, with the light rays of a hundred various, stainless, and vast qualities shining on the earth and in the paradises, with the vision of unimpeded wisdom, and the power to suppress adversaries, accompanied by a thousand bhikṣus, was traveling and passing through the Pañcala land and came to a forest.
“There he saw a place of soft pasture, green and blue, with its surface adorned by a variety of aromatic flowers.
When he saw that, the Bhagavat said to Venerable Ānanda, ‘Ānanda, this area is beautiful; it has the signs of a place for me to speak, so now prepare a seat for the Tathāgata.’
“In accordance with the Bhagavat’s instruction, he prepared a seat.
When it was prepared, he said to the Bhagavat: “ ‘Excellent, supreme Bhagavat, sublime giver of the supreme to humans, Bringer of liberation from the bondage of existence, your seat is prepared.
I pray that you be seated and speak the amṛta of the sublime instructions That bring liberation so as to benefit beings.’
“The Bhagavat then sat on the seat and said to the bhikṣus, ‘Bhikṣus, do you want to see the bones of a bodhisattva who did that which was difficult to do?’
“The bhikṣus said to the Bhagavat: “ ‘Excellent Ṛṣi, tell us well, for the time has come for us to see The bones of someone dedicated to the benefit of beings, Who had patience, great diligence and delighted in peace and self-control, Who delighted in wisdom and mindfulness and possessed immeasurable qualities.’
“The Bhagavat then stamped on the ground’s surface with the sole of his foot, which was as soft as a newly blossomed lotus flower and had marked upon it the design of a wheel with a thousand spokes.
As soon as he had pressed down on the earth, it shook in six ways and a stūpa made of silver and gold emerged from it.
“The Bhagavat then said to Venerable Ānanda, ‘Ānanda, open this stūpa!’
“Venerable Ānanda, obeying the Bhagavat, opened the stūpa and saw inside it some golden caskets covered with jewels and pearls that shone with a golden light.
Having seen that, he told the Bhagavat, ‘Bhagavat, there are golden caskets.’
“ ‘Open all these seven caskets!” said the Bhagavat.
“He thus opened them all, and he saw in them bones that were the color of snow and water lilies.
Having seen them, he told the Bhagavat, ‘Bhagavat, there are bones.’
“ ‘Ānanda, bring the bones of the great being!’ said the Bhagavat.
“Venerable Ānanda picked up those bones and gave them to the Buddha Bhagavat.
The Bhagavat took the bones, held them in front of the saṅgha, and said: “ ‘These are the bones of someone who possessed the accumulation of supreme qualities, had supreme understanding, And had sublime, supreme self-control, meditative stability, patience, enthusiasm, and renown.
Moreover, they created in those with understanding a constant enthusiasm and aspiration for this enlightenment, And they have created a delight for giving in those with perfect understanding.’
“The Bhagavat then said to the bhikṣus, ‘Bhikṣus, pay homage to the bones of a bodhisattva that are suffused with good conduct and good qualities, that are supremely difficult to see, and that are a field of merit.’
“Those bhikṣus placed their palms together and with aspiration paid homage to the bones.
“Then Venerable Ānanda, with palms together, said to the Bhagavat, ‘The Bhagavat Tathāgata is higher than all worlds and is to be paid homage by all beings, so why does the Tathāgata pay homage to these bones?’
“The Bhagavat replied to Venerable Ānanda, ‘Ānanda, it is through these bones that I quickly attained the highest, most complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
Ānanda, in the past, in a time gone by, there was a king by the name of Mahāratha, who had many troops and vehicles and unimpeded power, and who had subjugated his adversaries.
He had three sons who were like young gods: Mahāpraṇāda, Mahādeva, and Mahāsattva.
“ ‘At a certain point the king, in order to amuse himself, went to a park; the boys, attracted to the qualities of that park, and desiring flowers, ran back and forth and came to twelve great, dense forests, which the princes entered.
The princes dismissed their attendants, who then went here and there while the princes entered the twelve great, dense forests in the protected park.
“ ‘Mahāpraṇāda said to his two younger brothers, “I am oppressed by the fear in my heart that we could be killed by wild beasts.
Let’s go back!”
“ ‘Mahādeva said, “I am not afraid, but in my heart there is the thought of being separated from beloved people.”
“ ‘Mahāsattva said: “ ‘ “I have no fear and have no sadness In this solitary forest praised by sages.
My heart has become filled with joy, Thinking I will find a vast, excellent purpose.”
“ ‘As the young princes were wandering in the midst of those twelve great, dense forests, they saw a tigress who had given birth seven days before, encircled by her five cubs.
She was so hungry and thirsty and exhausted that her body was completely weakened.
“ ‘When they saw her, Mahāpraṇāda said, “Alas, this afflicted creature has given birth to cubs some six or seven days ago.
Now that she has not found food, she will eat her own cubs or will die of hunger.”
“ ‘ “What does this tormented one eat?”
asked Mahāsattva.
“ ‘ “Fresh meat and warm blood is said to be the food of tigers, black bears, brown bears, and lions,” answered Mahāpraṇāda.
“ ‘Mahādeva said, “She has a body that is tormented by hunger and thirst, and she has only a little life left.
She is so weakened she will not be able to seek for food and drink in this place. Who would give up their own body to save her life?”
“ ‘ “Oh!
To give up one’s body would be a difficult thing to do!”
said Mahāpraṇāda.
“ ‘ “For us,” said Mahāsattva, “who have small minds and are attached to life and body, it would be difficult to do, but for supreme beings who give their bodies to others, who are dedicated to benefiting others, it would not be difficult.
“ ‘ “The noble beings who arise from pity and compassion, Thinking they will find a body in paradise or on this earth, With a joyful mind oriented to saving the lives of others Without wavering, would delight in this in a hundred ways.”
“ ‘As they went away, the young prince was very unhappy and kept looking back at the tigress, staring at her from afar.
“ ‘Mahāsattva thought, “The time has come for me to give away my body.
Why is that?
“ ‘ “For a long time I have taken care of this body of pus With food, drink, beds, carriages, and other suitable things, But it will naturally fall apart and be destroyed, come to an end, have a bad end.
It has never before rid itself of that nature; it has no benefit.
“ ‘ “It is in all respects impure and therefore cannot be kept alive, so I should use it for something better.
Therefore, I will become like a great ship that crosses the ocean of births and deaths. It has no essence; it is like foam. It is filled with worms and is a waste.
It has a hundred growths that are like boils.
It is filled with urine and feces, and I will give it away.
“ ‘ “I will obtain the Dharma body that is without misery, changeless, never ruined, stainless, completely filled with such qualities as meditation, filled with a hundred qualities, and free of all impurities.”
“ ‘With a heart that was filled with perfect compassion, and self-controlled in that way, he said, “You two go on.
I have something of my own to do and will go back into the twelve dense forests,” and he sent them both away.
“ ‘The young prince then returned into the great forest and went to the location of the tigress.
He hung his clothes on a branch, and prayed, “I wish to attain the unequaled peace of enlightenment in order to benefit beings.
With unchanging, wise compassion, I make a gift of the body, which others find hard to give away.
May I attain the faultless, priceless enlightenment that bodhisattvas seek.
May I free the three worlds from the terrifying ocean of existence.”
“ ‘Mahāsattva then laid himself down before the tigress, but the tigress did nothing to the loving bodhisattva.
“ ‘The bodhisattva thought, “Oh! She is too weak to do anything!” and got up.
With the wisdom of compassion, he sought a weapon. He could not find a weapon anywhere, so he took the branch of a bamboo that was a hundred years old and hard, cut his throat with it, and fell before the tigress.
“ ‘As soon as the bodhisattva fell, the earth shook six times like a ship in the middle of water being shaken by the wind.
The sun also was eclipsed, and the beauty of its light rays vanished.
There also fell a rain of flowers mixed with divine incense and powders.
“ ‘Then a deva with a marveling mind praised the bodhisattva: “ ‘ “Excellent wise one, you have in this way pervaded all beings with your compassion.
You have pleased the lords of humans by giving away your body in this way.
You will soon find here, without difficulty and without impediment, a pure peace, The supreme state of peace that is free of the meaning of birth and death.”
“ ‘The tigress licked the bodhisattva’s body soaked in blood, and soon there was nothing left of the body but bones without flesh or blood.
“ ‘Then Mahāpraṇāda, thinking about the earthquake, said to Mahādeva: “ ‘ “This earth, as far as the oceans and including the oceans, shook; The sun was without light, and there was a rain of flowers.
Also, my mind became disturbed, so it seems as if Our younger brother has given away his body.”
“ ‘Mahādeva said: “ ‘ “I also became worried when he spoke Those words of compassion while gazing upon The starving one tormented by a hundred sufferings, Extremely weak and ready to eat her own cubs.”
“ ‘Then those two young princes, oppressed by sadness, their eyes filled with tears, returned along their path and reached the tigress.
They saw all their brother’s clothes were hung upon a bamboo branch, his bones were torn apart and separated, his blood had muddied the ground, and his hair was scattered here and there.
“ ‘When they saw that, they fainted, falling on his bones, where they lay for a while until they revived, stood up, stretched out their arms, and emitted cries of despair.
“ ‘ “Alas! Beloved young brother!
The king And also the mother who loves her son Will ask us about our little brother: ‘Where have you left the one with lotus eyes?’
“ ‘ “Alas, it would be better for us two to die In this place, for it will not be good if we live!
How will our parents be able to look upon us When Mahāsattva no longer exists?”
“ ‘Then the two young princes, weeping and crying out pitifully in many ways, returned.
“ ‘The attendants of the young princes had gone in search of them, running around in all directions, and when they saw one another they asked, “Where is the boy?
Where is the boy?”
“ ‘At that time, the queen was sleeping in her bed, and in a dream she became separated from a loved one in this way: her breasts were both cut off, her teeth fell out, and she saw a hawk carry off one of three frightened dove chicks.
Then the queen, alarmed by the earth shaking, woke up at that moment and became deep in thought: “ ‘ “This support of beings, which is clothed by the oceans, has been completely shaken.
The light rays of the sun vanished, which indicates that there will be grief in my heart.
My limbs weakened, my eyes rolled, and I dreamed my breasts were cut off.
My sons who have gone to play in the forest—is all well with them or not?”
“ ‘As she was thinking in this way, a servant, deeply distressed, came and said to the queen, “Your Majesty, the attendants of the princes say that they are searching for the boys, that the lords are lost!”
“ ‘The moment the queen heard that, her heartbeat quivered, and her eyes and face streamed with tears. She went to the king and said, “Your Majesty, I have heard that our beloved sons are lost!”
“ ‘The king’s heart quivered also, and he was very distressed and cried, “Alas! I have lost my beloved sons!”
“ ‘Then the king, in order to reassure the queen, said, “I will diligently search for the boys, so do not distress yourself, Your Majesty.”
“ ‘He then went in search of the boys, with many people busily engaged in it.
Before long, the king saw the two princes coming in the distance.
When he saw them, he cried out, “Those are the boys coming, but not all of them are there! Oh! It seems we have lost a son!”
In suffering, he said: “ ‘ “The happiness that humans have on obtaining a child Does not equal the unhappiness from losing a child.
Are not those humans in this world happy who die while Their sons are alive, or who have not given birth to children?”
“ ‘Then the queen, oppressed by misery like a heartbroken she-camel, emitted dreadful cries.
“ ‘ “Thus my three boys, with their servants, Entered the flower-filled forest, But my lovely youngest child has not returned!
Where is my youngest son, who is like my own heart?”
“ ‘Then the two princes arrived, and the king questioned them.
He asked the two youths, “Where is your youngest brother?”
“ ‘They were so devastated by misery, their eyes filled with tears, and their palates, lips, mouths, and teeth having become dry, that they could not say anything.
“ ‘The queen asked: “ ‘ “Where is my beloved youngest son?
This heart of mine is about to break, My body is struck by unendurable pain, And my mind is fainting, so tell me quickly!”
“ ‘The two youths then related in detail what had occurred, and as soon as the king and queen heard it, they swooned.
When they recovered from their swoon, they cried piteously and went to that place.
“ ‘When the king and queen saw those bones with no flesh, blood, or entrails remaining and the hair scattered here and there, they collapsed as if blown over by a wind.
“ ‘When the principal attendants and ministers saw that, they soothed the king and queen’s bodies with a balm made of water and Malaya Mountain sandalwood.
“ ‘After a long time had passed, they recovered consciousness, and the king stood and cried out piteously: “ ‘ “Why has my beautiful, handsome, delightful son Fallen so quickly under the power of the lord of death?
Why have I not gone to the lord of death before him?
Compared to this, I have never had any suffering.”
“ ‘The queen also, when she had recovered from her faint, loosened her hair and beat her breast with both hands, writhed on the ground like a fish on dry land, and cried out piteously like a female buffalo or a female camel that has lost her offspring: “ ‘ “Alas!
Who would rend and scatter on the earth My beloved, beautiful son, who was like a lotus?
What enemy of mine has, on this day, in this place, destroyed My son who had beautiful eyes and a face like the moon?
“ ‘ “Alas! Why has my body not been broken on this day By seeing my perfect son slain on this ground?
This heart of mine must truly be made of iron To have not split apart on witnessing this suffering.
“ ‘ “Because in a dream I had today Someone cut off my breasts with a sword And my teeth fell out, I knew something Dreadful had happened to my son.
“ ‘ “I had found three chicks of a dove, And one of them was taken away by a hawk.
In that way, from the three boys who were around me, The lord of death has taken one away today.”
“ ‘Then the king and queen, crying out pitifully many times, cast off their jewelry and together with a great crowd of beings made offerings to the boy’s bones, and then they placed the bones in this spot.
“ ‘Ānanda, if you think that at that time, in that time, the prince called Mahāsattva was anyone else, do not have that view.
Why is that?
At that time, I was the prince called Mahāsattva.
“ ‘Ānanda, even at that time, when I was not completely freed from desire, anger, and ignorance, I helped every being, such as those in the hells, be freed from suffering, let alone now when I am a samyak­saṃbuddha who is free of all faults.
“ ‘In that way, for the sake of each being, I would gladly remain in hell for eons and liberate that being from saṃsāra.
Those who are dedicated to beings accomplish numerous different kinds of difficult actions so as to benefit all beings.’
“The Bhagavat then spoke these verses: “ ‘For many eons, I gave away my body When seeking the highest enlightenment.
Whether I was a king or a prince, I gave away my body in that way.
“ ‘I remember my previous lives: There was a king named Mahāratha Who had a son that made the great gift, A sublime one called Mahāsattva.
“ ‘He had two elder brothers Named Mahāpraṇāda and Mahādeva.
The group of siblings went into a thick forest Where they saw a tigress tormented by hunger.
“ ‘Compassion for her arose in that excellent being: “This tigress is so tormented by hunger and thirst She will eventually eat her own children.
Therefore, I will give her my body.”
“ ‘Mahāsattva, Mahāratha’s son, Seeing the hungry tigress, with compassion So as to save the tiger cubs Leapt from a mountain cliff.
“ ‘The earth and the mountains shook, The multitudes of birds scattered, The herds of deer were frightened, And this world was enveloped in darkness.
“ ‘His older brother Mahāpraṇāda, And likewise Mahādeva, both Looked in that great forest But could not find Mahāsattva.
“ ‘Their hearts pained by intense misery, They roamed within the forest mindlessly, Searching for their younger brother.
Faces streaming with tears, they wandered the forest.
“ ‘Those two young princes, Mahāpraṇāda and Mahādeva, Came near the place where The weakened tigress was lying.
“ ‘They saw blood on the mouths Of the tigress and the tiger cubs, And some bones and hair were Scattered there upon the ground.
“ ‘There were a few drops of blood That had fallen onto the ground.
Those two princes saw that The earth was bloodstained.
“ ‘They completely fainted away And lay on the ground unconscious, Their bodies covered with dirt, Without awareness, their minds in a swoon.
“ ‘All of their entourage Wept piteously, overcome with misery.
They sprinkled water upon them And with arms outstretched, wept.
“ ‘The moment that they had fainted, Their mother, the beloved principal queen, Was happily dwelling in the palace With five hundred other women.
“ ‘From the nipples of both breasts, Her milk came forth as dripping blood.
Her entire body and all her limbs Were in pain as if pierced by needles.
“ ‘Her heart became filled with misery, Hit by the arrow of the grief of losing a child.
She came before the king, Deeply tormented by misery and in distress.
“ ‘With piteous cries she wept And said to King Mahāratha, “King, lord of men, listen to me.
My body is burned by the fire of misery.
“ ‘ “From the nipples of both my breasts The milk has emerged as blood.
My body is in pain as if pierced by needles, And my heart feels about to break.
“ ‘ “This seems to be a sign that I will Never again see my beloved sons.
Therefore, regard me with compassion— Find my sons and give me my life!
“ ‘ “In a dream that I had today, I found three dove chicks.
One of the dove chicks was, To me, the loveliest and prettiest.
“ ‘ “A hawk came, and that hawk Took my dove chick away.
A grief like that in the dream Has entered here into my heart.
“ ‘ “My mind is so tormented by sadness It will not be long before I die.
Therefore, you who are compassionate, Find my sons and give me my life!”
“ ‘After she had spoken, the principal queen Fainted and lay there on the floor, The faculty of awareness lost, Her mind scattered and unconscious.
“ ‘All of the queen’s retinue also Were weeping with pitiful cries On seeing that the principal queen Had fainted and was lying on the floor.
“ ‘Immediately, the lord of kings, Oppressed by the misery of losing his sons, Dispatched his ministers and court To go in search of the youths.
“ ‘All the people throughout the town Came out of their homes and gathered.
Weeping, with tears streaming down their faces, They asked about Mahāsattva on the roads: “ ‘ “Is he alive or is he dead?
Where has Mahāsattva gone?
Will we see him today?
How joyful to see that delightful being!”
“ ‘They soon heard an unpleasant sound, A dreadful wind of misery in this land— Endless manifestations that emitted no sound, Together with those with ferocious sounds.
“ ‘King Mahāratha, standing up, Oppressed by misery and weeping, Continually sprinkled water on The principal queen lying on the floor.
“ ‘He continued to sprinkle water Until she had regained consciousness.
She asked with a despairing mind, “Are my sons alive or dead?”
“ ‘King Mahāratha said To his principal queen, “The ministers and the court Have gone in search of the boys.
“ ‘ “Do not let your mind be in deep despair And have continuous misery in your heart.”
Speaking in that way, Mahāratha Comforted the principal queen.
“ ‘The king came out of the palace Oppressed by misery and weeping, Accompanied by his ministers, In despair, his body weakened.
“ ‘Also, many hundreds of people, Running, weeping, with tears streaming, Were coming out of the greatest of cities In order to search for the princes.
“ ‘When they saw the king departing, They all followed after the king.
When King Mahāratha came out Of the city, he immediately “ ‘Looked around with wild eyes Seeking for his beloved sons.
He saw a man approaching With head shaved and bloody hands, “ ‘His body stained with dirt, weeping, With tears streaming down his face.
Then there was an unendurable misery Within the heart of Mahāratha.
“ ‘He wept, tears running down his face.
Standing with arms outstretched, he wept.
Then another minister came quickly, Hurriedly, from the far distance.
“ ‘When he arrived, he said to the king, The lord of men, Mahāratha, “My lord, do not be sad, Your beloved sons are alive.
“ ‘ “Before long they will be here with you, And you will see your beloved, excellent sons!”
The king in a moment set out on the road, And then two prime ministers came.
“ ‘Their clothes were dirty and stained And with tears on their faces they said to the king, “Great King, two of your sons are alive But burning from the fire of misery.
“ ‘ “King, one of your excellent sons is missing; Mahāsattva has been seized by impermanence.
He saw a tigress that had recently given birth And she was craving to eat her own cubs.
“ ‘ “The youth Mahāsattva had for them A motivation of great compassion.
He made a great prayer for enlightenment, Saying, ‘I am going to liberate all beings!
“ ‘ “ ‘May I in the future reach that vast, Profound enlightenment that I long for!’
Mahāsattva leapt from a mountain cliff And was taken by the tigress tormented by hunger.
“ ‘ “In a brief time his body had no flesh; Soon only the bones of the prince remained.”
King Mahāratha fell into a faint When he heard these dreadful words.
“ ‘He fell to the ground and lost consciousness, Burned by the unendurable fire of grief.
His court and the ministers with piteous cries wept, And though oppressed by misery, “ ‘They sprinkled water on him, weeping with upraised arms.
A third minister said to the king, “Today I saw that the two princes Had fainted in that great forest.
“ ‘ “They were lying on the ground, unconscious, And we sprinkled water upon them Until they recovered and stood up.
Ablaze, they looked into the four directions, “ ‘ “And after briefly standing, they again fell to the ground.
With piteous cries they emitted wails, Their arms constantly upraised and in despair, And spoke in praise of their younger brother.”
“ ‘The king was in complete despair; In grief from the loss of his son, his mind was in disarray.
Tormented by his grief, he emitted wails, And in his mind the king had this thought: “ ‘ “My one beloved, beautiful son Mahāsattva has been seized by impermanence, And the other two sons of mine Will lose their lives to the fire of grief.
“ ‘ “Therefore, I must quickly go there To see my two beloved sons.
Then I will quickly bring the princes To the royal capital and into the royal palace.
“ ‘ “The heart of their mother, who gave them birth, May break because of the fire of her grief.
She will attain peace from seeing her two sons, And then she will not lose her life.”
“ ‘The king, accompanied by his ministers, Riding an elephant, went to see that place.
He saw his two sons coming along the road, weeping, With pitiful cries calling the name of their younger brother.
“ ‘The king collected those two sons; Weeping, they went to their home.
In that way he was able to quickly, speedily Show the queen her own two sons.
“ ‘In the past, I, Śākyamuni, the Tathāgata, Was that excellent Mahāsattva, Who was the son of King Mahāratha That brought happiness to the tigress.
“ ‘The excellent lord of kings, Śuddhodana, Was the king who was named Mahāratha.
The queen was the excellent Queen Māyā.
Mahāpraṇāda was Maitreya.
“ ‘Similarly, Prince Mahādeva Was Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta.
The tigress was Mahāprajāpatī, And the tiger cubs were the five bhikṣus.
“ ‘Then King Mahāratha and the queen, wailing pitifully many times, removed their jewelry and, together with a great gathering of people, made offerings to the bones of their son.
The bones of Mahāsattva they placed in this area, and they constructed this stūpa of seven precious materials.
“ ‘This Mahāsattva, having given his body to the tigress, prayed, “Through this gift of my body, may I afterward, in a future time, after countless eons have passed, accomplish the deeds of a buddha for beings.” ’
“When this teaching was given, countless, innumerable beings, including humans and devas, developed the aspiration to attain the highest, most complete enlightenment.
“This was the cause and condition for the appearance of that stūpa.
Then, through the blessing of the Buddha, the stūpa went back down into the ground.”
This concludes “The Gift of the Body to a Tigress,” the eighteenth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 19: Praise by All Bodhisattvas Then those hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas went to where the Tathāgata Suvarṇa­ratnākaracchatra­kūṭa was.
When they arrived, they bowed down their heads to the feet of the Bhagavat Tathāgata Suvarṇa­ratnākaracchatra­kūṭa and arranged themselves to one side.
Having arranged themselves to one side, those hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas placed their palms together and praised the Tathāgata Suvarṇa­ratnākaracchatra­kūṭa with these verses: “The color of the Jina’s body is like refined gold; Your body is completely the color of gold, A golden color like a golden lord of mountains.
You are a muni, a white lotus, the color of gold.
“Your body is adorned by the excellent signs; Your body is beautified by the various excellent features.
You are shining with beautiful golden light.
You are stainless and peaceful like the lord of mountains.
“You have Brahmā’s voice, the beautiful voice of Brahmā.
You have the roar of a lion, a voice of resounding thunder.
You have the voice with sixty qualities, a stainless voice.
You have a jina’s voice, the peacock and the kalaviṅka’s sound.
“You have completely stainless, immaculate, beautiful, bright light.
You are a jina adorned by the signs of a hundred qualities.
Your ocean of wisdom is stainless, perfectly free of stain.
You are a jina like Sumeru, endowed with all qualities.
“You have the supreme compassion for benefiting beings.
You are the supreme bringer of happiness to the worlds.
You are a jina who teaches the sublime meaning.
You are a guide toward the bliss of nirvāṇa.
“You bestow the bliss of deathlessness; You are a jina who teaches the Dharma of deathlessness; You are a guide for the city of deathlessness.
You are the source of all happiness, the basis of happiness.
“You are a jina who frees beings from suffering; You liberate beings from the ocean of suffering.
You lead beings on the path to peace.
You bestow all happiness upon beings.
“There is no analogy that will serve for you.
You are an ocean of wisdom with the qualities of all guides.
You have the power, methods, and diligence Of compassion and love for all beings.
“There is no one among beings, including devas, Who even in thousands of millions of eons Would be able to teach even one drop of the qualities From your ocean of wisdom and qualities.
“I have taken a drop of qualities from the ocean of your qualities And in that way have taught a little of it briefly.
Through whatever merit I have accumulated, May those beings reach the supreme enlightenment.”
This concludes “Praise by All Bodhisattvas,” the nineteenth chapter of “The Lord King of the Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 20: The Praise of All Tathāgatas Then the bodhisattva Ruciraketu rose from his seat and, with his upper robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee with palms together, bowed toward the Bhagavat, and then praised the Bhagavat through these verses: “Lord of munis, you have the signs of a hundred merits; You are adorned by the qualities of a thousand beautiful splendors.
You have an exalted color, you manifest supreme peace, And you shine with light like a thousand suns.
“You pervade with light by radiating numerous light rays Filled with various colors, so that you resemble a jewel; You have blue, white, golden, and beryl lights, And lights like copper, the dawn, and crystals.
“They reach the vajra mountain, lord of mountains, Sumeru, And they illuminate numerous millions of realms And bring to an end fierce, terrible suffering, And bring perfect happiness that satisfies beings.
“You have a bright color and sense organs that are beautiful to behold.
Beings delight to see you and never tire of looking at your body.
Your hair is so beautiful and has the colors of a peacock, Gleaming as if it were a mass of numerous bees.
“You are adorned by the qualities of completely pure compassion.
You have an accumulation of sublime samādhi, love, and merit.
You are endowed with the various excellent features and colors.
You are adorned by the qualities of samādhi and enlightenment.
“You bring complete satisfaction and bring benefit; You bring happiness and bring the source of all happiness.
You are adorned by various profound qualities, And you brighten millions of realms.
“You are beautified by light rays that are like firelight; You are like the complete disk of the sun in the sky.
You possess all qualities, like Mount Sumeru, And you appear throughout all world realms.
“Your face is made beautiful by the rows of your teeth That are like cow curd, white water lilies, and the moon; They have an excellent whiteness, like the color of snow, And resemble the kings of geese in the sky.
“A hair like white beryl curls to the right, Within your peaceful, moon-like face.
Its white light is as beautiful As the sun in the middle of the sky.”
This concludes “The Praise of All Tathāgatas,” the twentieth chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
Chapter 21: The Conclusion Then the noble goddess Bodhisattvasamuccayā praised the Bhagavat with these verses: “I pay homage to the Buddha who has pure knowledge, Who has the knowledge with eloquence in the pure Dharma, Who has the knowledge that is free from the path of bad actions, And has the pure knowledge of existence and nonexistence.
“Oh! Oh! The Buddha’s magnificence is infinite! Oh!
Oh! He is like the ocean and Mount Sumeru! Oh! Oh!
The Buddha’s activity is infinite!
He is extremely rare like a fig tree flower!
“In order that he may care for all beings, He has taught such a sublime sūtra as this.
Oh! Oh!
The Tathāgata who has compassion, The lord of humans, the sun, the Śākya family’s crest— “The Tathāgata Śākyamuni is the lord of peace; He resides in sublime peace in the city of peace; His profound samādhi is a peace free of stain.
He has entered the field of activity of the buddhas, the jinas.
“In that way, the bodies of the disciples are empty; The locations of the supreme among humans are empty.
All of those phenomena are by nature empty, But beings do not understand that empty nature.
“I always, constantly think of the Buddha; I constantly grieve for the sight of the Jina.
I am constantly praying and supplicating In order to see the sun that is the perfect Buddha.
“I constantly kneel in one narrow spot, My mind pained by thirsting for the Jina’s form.
I weep and call out pitifully for the Guide, In extreme thirst for the sight of the Tathāgata.
“I am completely burned by the fire of my grief.
I pray you always give me the cooling water of your sight.
I am in extreme thirst for the sight of your form.
Refresh me with the rain of your compassion.
“I pray that you, the Guide, will be compassionate to me.
I pray that you bestow on me the sight of your peaceful form.
You are the savior of beings, including the devas, And thus the bodies of your disciples are empty.
“All beings have the nature of a dream.
They are like space and have the nature of space.
They are like illusions, mirages, and the moon on water.
Guide, yours is an emptiness of greatness.”
The Bhagavat then rose from his seat and with the voice of Brahmā said, “Noble goddess, well done!
Well done!”
When the Bhagavat had spoken, the noble goddess Bodhisattvasamuccayā, the noble goddess Sarasvatī, and all the other goddesses—the noble goddess Śrī and all the rest of the entire assembly of goddesses—and Vaiśravaṇa and all the other kings of devas, and the assembly that had all the different kinds of disciples, and the world with its devas, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the words of the Bhagavat.
This concludes “The Conclusion,” the twenty-first chapter of “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light.”
The Mahāyāna sūtra “The Lord King of Sūtras, the Sublime Golden Light” is concluded.
ye dharmahetuprabhavā hetun teśān tathāgato hy avadat eśāñ ca yo nirodhā evaṃ vādī mahāśramanaḥ svāhā

